--- Page 1 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing 
in Dentistry  
Good Practice Guidelines
3rd Edition
Antimicrobial Prescribing 
for General Dental 
Practitioners
updated 2016
--- Page 2 ---

--- Page 3 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
i
Antimicrobial Prescribing 
in Dentistry 
Good Practice Guidelines
3rd Edition
EDITOR: NIKOLAUS O PALMER
BDS MFGDP(UK) PhD FDS RCSEng FFGDP(UK)
--- Page 4 ---
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
ii
Royal College of Surgeons of England
35-43 Lincoln’s Inn Fields 
London WC2A 3PE
Registered charity no. 212808  
© Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 2020
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of the Faculty of General 
Dental Practice UK (FGDK[UK]), or as expressly permitted by law or by licence. Enquiries concerning the 
reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Faculty of General Dental Practice UK  
at fgdp@fgd.org.uk. 
First edition published 2000  
Adult Antimicrobial Prescribing in Primary Dental Care for General Dental Practitioners
Second edition published 2012, updated 2012  
Antimicrobial Prescribing for General Dental Practitioners 
Third edition published 2020  
Antimicrobial Prescribing in Dentistry: Good Practice Guidelines
ISBN: 978-1-8381964-2-4
e-ISBN: 978-1-8381964-3-1
Please cite this work as: 
Palmer, N. (Ed). Antimicrobial Prescribing in Dentistry: Good Practice Guidelines. 3rd Edition. London, UK: 
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) and Faculty of Dental Surgery; 2020.
Whilst every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the information contained in this publication, 
no guarantee can be given that all errors and omissions have been excluded. The Faculty of General Dental 
Practice UK and the Faculty of Dental Surgery do not accept responsibility or legal liability for any errors in 
the text, the misuse or misapplication of material in this work, or loss occasioned to any person acting or 
refraining from action as a result of material in this publication. 
Design & print: Smart Monkey Design  
smartmonkey@mail.uk
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
--- Page 5 ---
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
iii
CONTENTS
FOREWORD    vi
CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS viii
1 INTRODUCTION  1
 1.1 Scope of the guidance  3
 1.2 Development and presentation of the guidance  4
2 PRESCRIPTION WRITING 7
3 ASSESSMENT OF THE PATIENT 11
4 ACUTE DENTO-ALVEOLAR INFECTIONS 13
 4.1 Acute periapical infections 13
 4.2 Severe rapidly spreading dento-facial abscesses;  
      cellulitis and Ludwig’s angina 16
 4.3 Antimicrobial drugs of choice 17
5 CHRONIC DENTAL INFECTIONS 27
 5.1  Chronic dento-alveolar infections 27
 5.2  Osteomyelitis  28
 5.3  Medication related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ)  30
 5.4  Osteoradionecrosis (ORN) 31
 5.5  Antimicrobial drug of choice 32
6 PERICORONITIS  33
 6.1 Antimicrobial drugs of choice 35
7 DRY SOCKET   39
8 ACUTE SINUSITIS  41
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
--- Page 6 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
iv
9 BACTERIAL SIALADENITIS 43
 9.1  Antimicrobial regimens 44
10 PERIODONTAL DISEASES 49
 10.1  Gingivitis  49
 10.2  Necrotising periodontal diseases 49
 10.3  Periodontitis  51
 10.4  Periodontal abscess 58
 10.5  Peri-implant disease 58
11 ENDODONTIC THERAPY 65
 11.1  Acute pulpitis  65
 11.2 Acute and chronic periapical infections 66
 11.3  Regenerative endodontic procedures (REP) 67
 11.4 Tooth avulsion 67
 11.5  Peri-radicular surgery 68
12 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS – HEALTHY PATIENTS 71
 12.1  Minor oral surgery 71
 12.2  Maxillofacial surgery 78
 12.3 Reimplantation of teeth 81
13 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS – MEDICALLY COMPROMISED PATIENTS 87
 13.1  Cardiac disease 87
 13.2  Total joint replacements 88
 13.3  Miscellaneous prosthetic implants 89
 13.4  Renal dialysis  89
 13.5  Intravenous access devices 90
 13.6 Immunocompromised patients 91
 13.7 Prophylactic antimicrobial regimens 99
CONTENTS
--- Page 7 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
v
14 VIRAL INFECTIONS  101
 14.1  Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis 101
 14.2  Secondary (recurrent) herpes simplex infections (HSV-1) 103
 14.3 Orofacial varicella zoster infections 104
15 FUNGAL INFECTIONS 109
 15.1  Oral candidosis 109
 15.2  Chronic mucocutaneous candidosis (CMC) 120
APPENDIX 1: GUIDANCE DEVELOPMENT 121
 1.1  Background  121
 1.2 Methodology  121
 1.3 Peer review   123
 1.4  Consultation   123
 1.5 Review and updating  124
APPENDIX 2: THE GUIDANCE DEVELOPMENT GROUP (GDG)  125
 2.1  Membership of the GDG 125
 2.2 Conflicts of interest 126
APPENDIX 3: ANTIMICROBIAL STEWARDSHIP RESOURCES 127
CONTENTS
--- Page 8 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
vi
FOREWORD
A core function of both the Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) (FGDP[UK])  
and the Faculty of Dental Surgery (FDS) of the Royal College of Surgeons of England  
is to raise the standards of care delivered to patients, through education of the 
dental profession and the provision of evidence-based guidance. FGDP(UK) 
originally published guidance on antimicrobial prescribing for general dental 
practitioners in 2000. A second edition was published in 2012 which has since  
been updated to reflect relevant changes in the field. We are delighted that a  
third edition has been developed as a collaborative project in partnership with  
FDS, and that the new edition encompasses guidelines for dentistry rather than 
simply general dental practice.
As dentists, antimicrobials can be an important adjunctive therapy within our 
armamentarium for treating oral infection. There are clear benefits for patients 
when prescribed appropriately, but there are also risks, which is why responsible 
and judicious prescribing is extremely important. In addition to side effects and 
adverse reactions, increasing focus has been placed on the potential impact of 
antimicrobial resistance. 
The dental profession has worked assiduously to highlight the importance of 
antimicrobial stewardship and to promote responsible prescribing. Antimicrobials 
should only be prescribed when there is a strong clinical indication to do so, and 
the provision of clear guidance is an important resource to support dentists to 
prescribe appropriately and responsibly. This third edition of Antimicrobial 
Prescribing in Dentistry: Good Practice Guidelines  provides such a resource, and  
will undoubtedly continue to be a key reference document for the dental team. 
--- Page 9 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
vii
We are extremely grateful to the various contributors who have spent considerable 
time and effort ensuring that this document is informative, accessible and highly 
relevant to all members of the dental team. In particular, we would like to 
acknowledge and thank Dr Nikolaus Palmer for his significant contribution  
as Chair of the Guidance Development Group.
Ian Mills
Dean of the Faculty of  
General Dental Practice (UK)
Trustee, College of General Dentistry
Matthew Garrett
Dean of the Faculty of  
Dental Surgery, Royal College  
of Surgeons of England
--- Page 10 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
viii
CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
Nikolaus Palmer
General Dental Practitioner, Clinical Adviser in Dental Education,  
Research Fellow, Health Education England North West 
Noha Seoudi
Senior Lecturer, Specialist in Clinical Oral Microbiology, Institute of Dentistry,  
Queen Mary University of London
Mark Ide
Reader in Periodontology, Hon Consultant in Restorative Dentistry,  
Kings College London
Christine Randall
Pharmacist, Assistant Director, North West Medicines Information  
and National Dental Medicines Information Service
Laura Hyland
Consultant in Special Care Dentistry, Birmingham Community Healthcare  
NHS Foundation Trust 
Amy Patrick
Registrar in Oral Surgery, Eastman Dental Hospital, University College London  
Hospital and Speciality Doctor Paediatrics, East Surrey Hospital
--- Page 11 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
1
The benefits of prescribing antimicrobials to treat or prevent infections are limited 
by a number of problems associated with their use, e.g. side effects, toxicity, allergic 
reactions and importantly, the development of resistant strains of microbes.1
Within the last few decades, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) has become a worldwide 
problem and constitutes a major threat to public health.2 AMR has increased as a 
result of widespread use of antimicrobials providing greater opportunity for bacteria 
to exchange genetic material, allowing resistant genes to spread between bacterial 
populations and rendering antimicrobials ineffective for their intended use. The 
inappropriate prescribing of antimicrobials by the healthcare professions is a major 
concern to be addressed, especially as fewer and fewer new antimicrobials are being 
developed.3 
Registered dentists, doctors and non-medical prescribers can legally prescribe from 
the whole of the British National Formulary (BNF), but dentists treating NHS patients 
are restricted to prescribing antimicrobials included on the Secretaries of State list 
published in the BNF.4 Dentists should not prescribe medicines other than to meet  
the identified dental needs of patients. They must make an appropriate assessment  
of the patient’s condition, prescribe within their experience and competence, and  
keep accurate records of the treatment.5 
It is a legal and regulatory requirement that dentists must involve patients in the 
decision-making process. This requires acknowledgement of the patients’ views about 
their condition and any proposed treatment.6,7 In the context of these guidelines,  
clear information including all the harms and benefits, must be provided to the 
patient where options may involve antimicrobial prescribing. 
INTRODUCTION1
--- Page 12 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
2
Primary care NHS dentists in England prescribe 7.4% of all antimicrobial prescription 
items in the whole of NHS primary care.8 The number of prescription items for 
antimicrobials provided by private dental care practitioners and secondary care 
dentists is unknown. It is estimated that in total, dentists prescribe 10% of all 
antimicrobials prescribed in England, and there is evidence of inappropriate use. 9-12 
This guidance has been developed to promote judicious antimicrobial prescribing 
and antimicrobial stewardship within dentistry. Antimicrobial stewardship has 
been defined broadly as a coherent set of actions to promote responsible use of 
antimicrobials.13 This necessitates organisational or healthcare-wide systems to 
promote and monitor responsible and appropriate use of antimicrobials to preserve 
their future effectiveness.14
Irresponsible or inappropriate use of antimicrobials include:
•	 Prescribing in the absence of an infection or where local measures will suffice
•	 Prescribing	prophylactically	when	not	indicated 	
•	 An	incorrect	dose	or	too	long	or	short	duration 	
•	 An	unnecessarily	broad	spectrum	or	narrow	spectrum	antimicrobial 	 
or wrong antimicrobial for the microbiology of a specific infection
•	 Treatment	not	adjusted	when	culture	data	is	available
•	 Use	of 	IV	when	oral	route	can	be	used
•	 Choosing	an	incorrect	antimicrobial	for	a	patient	with	a	known	allergy
Antimicrobial stewardship is about safe and effective use; prescribing the right 
antibiotic antimicrobial for the right clinical indication, at the right time, dose and 
route with minimal toxicity and minimal impact of subsequent resistance to the 
patient and future patients.15 Resources to embed antimicrobial stewardship in 
dentistry are signposted in Appendix 3.
It is generally accepted within dentistry that antimicrobials are indicated:
•	 As	an	 adjunct to the management of acute or chronic infections
•	 Where	definitive	treatment	has	to	be	delayed,	e.g.	referral	for	specialist	services 	 
for patients requiring a general anaesthetic or sedation, due to inability to 
establish drainage or if patients have comorbidities requiring hospitalisation. 
--- Page 13 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
3
These patients should, however, be treated as soon as possible to avoid  
repeat prescribing of antimicrobials
•	 To	prevent	infections	that	may	be	associated	with	dental	procedures
1.1 SCOPE OF THE GUIDANCE
Registered dentists are the healthcare professionals most likely to manage dental 
infections, although there is evidence that other healthcare prescribers also prescribe 
antimicrobials to manage oral and dental infections.16
The aim of this guidance is to help healthcare prescribers understand the role of 
antimicrobial agents in management of oral and dental infections. The guidance also 
aims to help rationalise and improve standards of antimicrobial prescribing within 
dentistry and to improve patient care. The guidance is intended to complement,  
and not replace, the BNF.4
This guidance is intended for all healthcare prescribers in primary and secondary 
dental care, including all general dental practitioners, community dentists, trainees 
and specialists (including oral and maxillofacial surgery) in the hospital service 
and those involved in dental education and research. The recommendations are 
appropriate for all dental patients, including adults, children, the elderly and those 
with special needs treated in the primary and secondary care setting. 
The guidance is not intended to be limiting or restrictive, but to be useful in the decision- 
making process and to be an aid to effective treatment planning and patient care. 
Importantly, it is not the intention of this guidance to provide advice on drug interactions. 
Dentists should be aware that serious drug reactions can occur between antimicrobial 
agents and concomitant drugs (e.g. miconazole/fluconazole and warfarin). 
Dentists are advised to routinely check the BNF or other authoritative sources, such 
as the Summary of Product Characteristics via the Electronic Medicines Compendium17 
for prescribing information. Information on any aspect of drug prescribing can be 
obtained from the UK Medicines Information Service (UKMI) (www.sps.nhs.uk). The 
regional UKMI centre in the North West of England provides a specialist service on drug 
--- Page 14 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
4
use in dentistry (www.sps.nhs.uk/articles/uk-dental-medicines-advice-service-ukdmas/).
This guidance updates the 2012 FGDP(UK) Antimicrobial Prescribing for General Dental 
Practitioners and widens the scope of the title to include management of oral and 
dental infections by specialists and trainees within the hospital environment.
1.2 DEVELOPMENT AND PRESENTATION OF THE GUIDANCE
In developing the recommendations for this guidance, a guidance development group 
including general dental practitioners, specialists from the hospital service and patient 
representatives was formed. The development group reviewed the available evidence, 
existing guidelines and, when necessary, consensus expert opinion and existing best 
clinical practice, to formulate its recommendations (see Appendices 1 and 2).
The development group used the GRADE (www.gradeworkinggroup.org) system when 
making recommendations within this guidance. The recommendations were graded 
(strong, weak or conditional) based on the quality of the scientific evidence (high, 
moderate, low or very low). It also considered factors such as benefits and harms to 
patients, specifically side effects, toxicity and AMR, both to the individual patient and the 
wider population, as well as variability in values and patient preferences. As a result, it was 
possible to make strong recommendations even where the quality of evidence is weak.18
A strong recommendation means that most informed patients would choose the 
recommended management. A conditional recommendation is one where there is a 
finer balance between benefit and harm. In these cases, it is likely that the majority 
would choose the recommended option.18
The key recommendations are highlighted in  dark green boxes  with an indication of 
the strength of the recommendation and the level of quality of the evidence. Where 
appropriate, clinical advice on assessment and definitive clinical treatment modalities 
for dental infections based on good clinical practice are included in the text and 
highlighted in  medium green boxes  with bullet points or flow charts. Antimicrobial 
agents with the recommended regimens based on the BNF are highlighted in  
 light green boxes.
--- Page 15 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
5
References
1 Davey P, Wilcox MH, Irving W. Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. 7th ed. Oxford: Oxford University  
Press; 2015. Chapter 17: Adverse drug reactions and patient safety, pp. 168-177.
2 World Health Organisation (WHO). Global action plan on antimicrobial resistance. [Internet].  
Geneva: WHO; 2015. Available at https://www.who.int/antimicrobial-resistance/publications/  
global-action-plan/en/. 
3 Review on Antimicrobial Resistance. Tackling Drug-Resistant Infections Globally: Final report  
and recommendations. [Internet]. New York: Review on Antimicrobial Resistance; 2016.  
Available at http://amr-review.org. 
4 Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary. 77th ed. [Internet]. London: BMJ Group  
and Pharmaceutical Press; 2019. Available at http://www.medicinescomplete.com. The reader is 
reminded that the BNF is constantly revised; for the latest guidelines please consult the current edition  
at www.medicinescomplete.com. 
5 General Dental Council. Guidance on prescribing medicines. [Internet]. London: General Dental 
Council; 2013. Available at https://www.gdc-uk.org. 
6 General Dental Council. Standards for the dental team. [Internet]. London: General Dental Council; 2013. 
Available at https://www.gdc-uk.org.
7 Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board [2015] SC 11 [2015] 1 AC 1430.
8 Prescription Cost Analysis – England, 2018 [Dental]. [Internet]. London: NHS Digital; 2018. 
9 Palmer NA, Pealing R, Ireland RS, et al. A study of therapeutic prescribing in National Health Service 
general dental practice in England. Br Dent J. 2000;188(10):554-8.
10 Harte H, Palmer NO, Martin MV. An investigation of therapeutic prescribing for children referred  
for general anaesthesia in three National Health Service trusts. Br Dent J. 2005;198(4):227-31.
11 Tulip DE, Palmer NO. A retrospective investigation of the clinical management of patients attending 
an out of hours dental clinic under the new NHS dental contract. Br Dent J. 2008;205(12);659-64.
12 Cope AL, Francis NA, Wood F, Chesnutt IG. Antibiotic prescribing in UK general dental practice:  
a cross sectional study. Community Dent Oral Epidemiol. 2006;44(2):145-53.
13 Dyar OJ, Huttner B, Schouten J, Pulcini C. What is antimicrobial stewardship? Clin Microbiol Infec. 
2017;23(11):793-8.
14 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Antimicrobial stewardship: systems  
and processes for effective antimicrobial medicine use. NICE guideline [NG15]. [Internet]. London: 
NICE; 2015. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng15.
15 British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy (BSAC). Antimicrobial stewardship from 
principles to practice. [Internet]. London: BSAC; 2018. Available at http://www.bsac.org.uk/
antimicrobialstewardshipebook/BSAC-AntimicrobialStewardship-FromPrinciplestoPractice-  
eBook.pdf. 
16 Cope AL, Wood F, Francis NA, et al. General practitioners’ attitude towards the management  
of dental conditions and use of antimicrobials in these consultations: a qualitative study.  
BMJ Open. 2015;(5):e008551.
17 The Electronic Medicines Compendium. [Internet]. London: Datapharm; 2020. Available at  
https://www.medicines.org.uk/emc.
18 Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al. Going from evidence to recommendations. BMJ. 
2008;(336):1049-51.
--- Page 16 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
6
--- Page 17 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
7
PRESCRIPTION WRITING2
This chapter is adapted from the BNF 1 with kind permission from the Pharmaceutical 
Press.
Prescriptions should be written or printed legibly in ink or otherwise so as to be 
indelible. They should be dated and should state the name and address of the patient, 
the address of the prescriber and an indication of the type of prescriber. In addition, 
they should be signed by the prescriber (computer-generated facsimile signatures do 
not meet the legal requirement for paper prescriptions).
The age and the date of birth of the patient should preferably be stated. It is a legal 
requirement in the case of prescription-only medicines to state the age for children 
under 12 years.
The following should be noted:
1 The strength or quantity to be contained in capsules, lozenges, tablets etc. should 
be stated by the prescriber. In particular, the strength of liquid preparations should  
be clearly stated (e.g. 125mg/5mL).
2 The unnecessary use of decimal points should be avoided, e.g. 3mg, not 3.0mg. 
Quantities of 1 gram or more should be written as 1g etc. Quantities less than  
1 gram should be written in milligrams, e.g. 500mg, not 0.5g. Quantities less  
than 1mg should be written in micrograms, e.g. 100 micrograms, not 0.1mg. 
 When decimals are unavoidable, a zero should be written in front of the decimal 
point where there is no other figure, e.g. 0.5mL, not .5mL. Use of the decimal  
point is acceptable to express a range, e.g. 0.5 to 1g.
3 ‘Micrograms’ and ‘nanograms’ should not be abbreviated. Similarly, ‘units’  
should not be abbreviated.
--- Page 18 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
8
4 The term ‘millilitre’ (ml or mL) is used in medicine and pharmacy, and cubic 
centimetre, c.c., or cm3 should not be used.
5 Dose and dose frequency should be stated; in the case of preparations to be  
taken ‘as required’, a minimum dose interval should be specified. Care should  
be taken to ensure children receive the correct dose of the active drug. Therefore, 
the dose should normally be stated in terms of the mass of the active drug,  
e.g. ‘125mg 3 times daily’.
6 The names of drugs and preparations should be written clearly and not 
abbreviated, using approved titles only.
7 The quantity to be supplied in primary care may be stated by indicating the 
number of days of treatment required in the box provided on NHS forms  
(FP10D in England, GP14 in Scotland and WP10D in Wales). In most cases, the  
exact amount will be supplied. 
 In the hospital setting, outpatient prescriptions should note the quantity or 
duration to be dispensed by the hospital pharmacy. Inpatient medication 
administration records or drug charts should state duration of treatment and/or  
a review date. 
8 Although directions should preferably be in English without abbreviation, it is 
recognised that some Latin abbreviations are used.
CLINICAL ADVICE  
•	 Never	prescribe	a	drug	unless	there	is	a	good	clinical	indication
•	 Make	prescriptions	clear
•	 Use	approved	names
•	 Always	make	the	source	of 	the	prescription	clear
•	 Always	record	prescription	details	in	the	clinical	notes
•	 Drugs	should	be	prescribed	in	pregnancy	 only when essential drug 
 treatment is necessary and where the benefit to the mother is greater
 than risk to the foetus, and all drugs should be avoided if possible 
 during the first trimester1
•	 Avoid	abbreviations:	give	the	name	of 	the	drug	in	full
--- Page 19 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
9
References
1 Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary. 77th ed. [Internet]. London: BMJ Group and 
Pharmaceutical Press; 2019. Available at http://www.medicinescomplete.com.  The reader is reminded 
that the BNF is constantly revised; for the latest guidelines please consult the current edition at www.
medicinescomplete.com. 
--- Page 20 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
10
--- Page 21 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
11
ASSESSMENT OF THE PATIENT3
Early recognition and management of dental infections is critical as patients 
(particularly children and immunocompromised patients) can become systemically 
ill within a very short space of time. Untreated local infections can spread, causing 
significant morbidity and even life-threatening sequelae, e.g. Ludwig’s angina.1
An assessment of the patient and diagnosis should be recorded in the clinical records 
and include:
•	 A	comprehensive	medical	and	dental	history	(see	FGDP(UK)’s	 Clinical Examination 
& Record-Keeping: Good Practice Guidelines)2
•	 Assessment	of 	the	presence	of	fever	(>	38°C),	malaise,	fatigue	or	dizziness	 
(NB: antipyretic effect of patients taking analgesics may temporarily lower  
the temperature)
•	 Measurement	of 	the	patient’s	pulse	and	temperature	(normal	temperature	 
range	is	36.2°C -37°C3)
•	 Definition	of 	the	nature,	location	and	extent	of	the	swelling,	and	any	
lymphadenopathy
•	 Identification	of 	the	cause	of	the	infection
•	 Assessment	of 	presence	of	sepsis	using	a	decision	support	tool,	e.g.	NICE	 
Sepsis: Risk stratification tools4
Following this assessment in primary care, the clinician should decide whether 
treatment can be provided or whether referral to a hospital specialist is necessary  
and urgent, particularly if there is/are:
•	 Signs	of 	septicaemia,	such	as	grossly	elevated	temperature	(above	39.5°C),	 
lethargy, tachycardia, tachypnoea and hypotension
•	 Signs	of 	severe	sepsis	or	septic	shock	(see	sepsis	decision	support	tool)4
•	 Spreading	cellulitis
--- Page 22 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
12
•	 Swellings	that	may	compromise	the	airway,	cause	difficulty	in	swallowing 	 
or closure of the eye
•	 Dehydration	characterised	by	lethargy,	dizziness	and	headache
•	 Significant	trismus	associated	with	a	dental	infection
•	 Failure	of 	resolution	of	infection	following	previous	treatment
•	 A	patient	who	is	unable	to	cooperate	with	necessary	and	appropriate	care
References
1 Britt JC, Josephson GD, Gross CW. Ludwig’s angina in the pediatric patient: report of a case and  
review of the literature. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2000;52(1):79-87.
2 Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK). Clinical Examination and Record Keeping: Good Practice 
Guidelines. 3rd ed. London: Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK); 2016. 
3 Geneva II, Cuzzo B, Fazili T, et al. Normal Body Temperature: A Systematic Review. Open Forum  
Infect Dis. 2019 Apr 9;6(4):ofz032. 
4 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Sepsis: Risk stratification tools. NICE 
guideline [NG51]. [Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
ng51/resources/algorithms-and-risk-stratification-tables-compiled-version-2551488301.
--- Page 23 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
13
ACUTE	 DENTO-ALVEOLAR	 INFECTIONS4
4.1 ACUTE PERIAPICAL INFECTIONS
Acute periapical infections are infections around the apex of the tooth associated with 
tooth decay or trauma causing necrosis of the dental pulp. There is associated pain, 
swelling (localised or spreading), tenderness of the tooth to percussion and mobility, 
possible raised temperature, malaise, lymphadenopathy and possible dehydration.  
Appropriate clinical assessment as detailed in chapter 3 is paramount.
It is widely accepted that immediate drainage of infection should be established by 
extraction of the causative tooth, opening of the root canal and/or incision of the 
swelling. Failure to do so can lead to spread of the infection and cellulitis.
Matthews et al. systematically reviewed the literature relating to the interventions for 
management of acute dento-alveolar infections in the permanent dentition.1 Of the 
eight eligible trials, six compared antimicrobials as an adjunct to concomitant therapy 
(incision and drainage, endodontic therapy or extraction) for relief of swelling. Four of 
these six studies tested alternatives to penicillin. Neither of the two studies comparing 
antimicrobials with placebo or with no active treatment demonstrated a benefit of 
antimicrobials.
A Cochrane review, limited to adults with a localised periapical abscess or a 
symptomatic tooth with a necrotic pulp and with no signs of a spreading infection or 
systemic involvement, identified two studies which compared the effects of penicillin 
with placebo as an adjunct to endodontic therapy. The evidence was of very low 
quality but showed that there was no difference in outcomes (pain, swelling) between 
patients who received antibiotics and those who received a placebo.2
--- Page 24 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
14
RECOMMENDATIONS  
Antimicrobials are only recommended as an adjunct to definitive
treatment where there is an elevated temperature, evidence of systemic
spread and local lymph node involvement
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
Majority of uncomplicated dental acute infections should be treated by
removal of the cause by drainage of the associated abscess, removal of
infected pulp contents or by extraction of the tooth
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE  
•	 Remove	the	source	of 	infection	and	establish	drainage
•	 Prescribe	antimicrobials	where	there	is	a	clear	indication	 (see 
 recommendation)  
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	analgesics	to	control	pain	and	fever	 (see NICE clinical 
 knowledge summary Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain3) 
•	 Ensure	fluid	balance	is	maintained
•	 Review	the	patient	2-3	days	after	definitive	treatment.	If 	resolution	
 of infection and temperature is normal, stop antimicrobials4,5
•	 Review	any	failure	of 	resolution	of	temperature	and	swelling.	Failure	
 of resolution is usually caused by failure to establish adequate drainage, 
 poor host response, poor patient compliance or misdiagnosis or infection 
 due to resistant microorganisms
•	 Where	failure	of 	resolution,	re-establish drainage or refer for specialist 
 advice
An algorithm for clinical management of acute dento-alveolar infections is shown  
in Figure 4.1.
--- Page 25 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
15
Figure 4.1 Algorithm for clinical management of acute dento-alveolar infections
Discontinue 
antimicrobial
Acute dento-alveolar
abscess
Patient apyrexial Patient pyrexial 
  or diffuse swelling
Remove cause,  
establish drainage  
No antimicrobials required
Remove cause, establish  
drainage, prescribe  
antimicrobials and analgesia
Review 2-3 daysReview 24 hours if inpatient 
2-3 days if outpatient
ResolutionResolution of swelling  
and temperature
Failure of resolution,
check and re-establish
drainage or refer
--- Page 26 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
16
4.2 SEVERE RAPIDLY SPREADING DENTO-FACIAL ABSCESSES;  
      CELLULITIS AND LUDWIG’S ANGINA
When an abscess spreads rapidly beyond the dento-alveolar area into the surrounding 
tissues with systemic signs and symptoms, management usually requires hospital 
admission (see clinical assessment and indications for referral in chapter 3) due to  
the possibility of severe complications. 
Despite a significant reduction in frequency and mortality, odontogenic infections can 
still be life-threatening. They may require urgent surgical intervention and intensive 
care management because of the potential for spread of infection into intracranial 
and peri-tracheal neck spaces and the risk of airway compromise if appropriate 
management is not instituted.6
Clinical assessment in secondary care:7
•	 Record	patient’s	temperature	and	clinical	signs	and	symptoms 	
•	 Assess	extent	and	nature	of 	swelling,	sepsis	risk	and	any	trismus,	dysphagia,	
dyspnoea and dysarthria
•	 Determine	source	of 	infection	and	immediate	risk	to	the	airway	or	infraorbital	
spread through an OPG radiograph and/or CT scan 
•	 Assess	whether	cellulitis	with	oedema	or	pus	is	present	that	requires	surgical 	
drainage
•	 Blood	tests	(including	blood	glucose)	and	blood/pus	cultures	for	sensitivity	testing
In an analysis of cases of Ludwig’s angina in the paediatric population, it was concluded 
that	successful	management	includes	provision	of	antimicrobials	(usually	IV),	open	
surgical drainage of any pus and removal of the cause, usually by extraction of the tooth.8
--- Page 27 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
17
RECOMMENDATION  
Antimicrobials (almost always IV) are recommended with incision, drainage 
and removal of the cause for severe rapidly spreading dento-alveolar infections
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE  
•	 Assess	airway	management.	May	necessitate	an	urgent	awake	surgical 	
 airway, such as a tracheostomy or cricothyroidotomy, as conventional 
 endotracheal intubation may be very difficult
•	 Commence	IV	antimicrobials	+	fluids	+	analgesics
•	 Keep	patient	fasted
•	 Prompt	aggressive	surgical	drainage	and	removal	of 	cause
•	 Microbiological	aspirate	sampling	of 	pus	at	the	time	of	incision	and	
 drainage with sensitivity testing and modification of antimicrobial 
 regimen if necessary
•	 Review	need	for	IV	antimicrobials	24-72	hours	post-surgery.	Decide 	
 whether to stop, switch to oral, change or continue antimicrobials9
4.3 ANTIMICROBIAL DRUGS OF CHOICE
Matthews et al. and Martins et al. compared outcomes of β lactam antimicrobials  
with alternatives in their systematic reviews. They suggested that there was no 
evidence to recommend one antimicrobial over another in the management of  
acute dental abscesses with systemic complications when drainage/and or removal  
of the cause was properly carried out.1,10
Antimicrobials are prescribed either empirically based on the microbiology of dental 
infections and antimicrobial sensitivity established in the literature, or based on the 
results of microbial susceptibility testing.11-13
A penicillin continues to be a highly effective antimicrobial against viridans 
Streptococci, group C Streptococci and Prevotella, whereas clindamycin was not  
--- Page 28 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
18
shown to be effective as an empirical drug of choice for a large number of 
odontogenic infections.14
A review of systematic reviews of duration of antimicrobial therapy in medical 
outpatient settings identified that shorter courses are as effective as long 
courses.15 Within dentistry, a prospective study showed that when patients with a 
spreading dental infection were provided with definitive treatment and adjunctive 
antimicrobials, it was resolved in 2-3 days. In a prospective audit of patients presenting 
with a spreading infection, provision of drainage and a 3-day course of antimicrobials 
provided full resolution.4,5
Short courses of antimicrobials (up to 5 days) are effective in dental infections and  
also reduce the pressure to select for antibiotic resistance and reduce side effects.
4.3.1 First choice antimicrobial
A penicillin, such as phenoxymethylpenicillin or amoxicillin, is effective for dento-
alveolar infections. Amoxicillin as a short course high dose has been shown in a 
randomised control trial to be as efficacious as a conventional phenoxymethylpenicillin 
regimen in the management of dental infections in children.16 Amoxicillin may be 
useful for short course oral regimens for infections when required. 
Amoxicillin has a broader spectrum of activity than phenoxymethylpenicillin, which, 
though as effective, is less reliably absorbed and needs to be taken four times daily 
on an empty stomach. However, amoxicillin may encourage emergence of resistant 
organisms. In line with the principles of antimicrobial stewardship, when prescribing 
antimicrobials to treat an infection that is not life-threatening, a narrow spectrum 
antibiotic should generally be the first choice.17
--- Page 29 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
19
PHENOXYMETHYLPENICILLIN
Adults
500mg orally four times a day, increased if necessary to 1g every 6 hours 
for up to 5 days
Children
•	 1-5 years: 125mg orally four times a day, increased if necessary up to 
 12.5mg/kg four times a day for up to 5 days
•	 6-11 years: 250mg orally four times a day, increased if necessary up to 
 12.5mg/kg four times daily for up to 5 days
•	 12-17 years: 500mg orally four times a day, increased if necessary up to 
 1g every 6 hours for up to 5 days
Intravenous injection or infusion for hospital inpatients
BENZYLPENICILLIN SODIUM (PENICILLIN G)
Administered by intramuscular injection, by slow intravenous injection, 
or	by	intravenous	infusion	and	maybe	combine	with	IV	metronidazole
Adults
0.6-1.2g every 6 hours, dose may be increased if necessary in more serious 
infections – single doses over 1.2g to be given by intravenous route only
Children
25mg/kg every 6 hours; increased if necessary to 50mg/kg every 4-6 hours 
(max. per dose 2.4g every 4 hours) in severe infections
Or (see next page)
--- Page 30 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
20
AMOXICILLIN
Adults 
500mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days, increased if necessary to 
1g every 8 hours in severe infections  
Intravenous injection or infusion for hospital inpatients
500mg every 8 hours, increased to 1g every 6 hours, use increased dose 
in severe infections
Children
•	 1-4 years: 250mg orally three times a day, increased if necessary up to 
 30mg/kg 3 times a day for up to 5 days
•	 5-11 years: 500mg orally three times a day, increased if necessary up to 
 30mg/kg 3 times a day (max. per dose 1g) for up to 5 days
•	 12-17 years: 500mg orally three times a day, increased if necessary up to 
 1g 3 times a day for up to 5 days. Use increased dose in severe infections
Intravenous injection or infusion for hospital inpatients
20-30mg/kg every 8 hours (max. per dose 500mg), increased if necessary to 
40-60mg/kg every 8 hours (max. per dose 1g every 8 hours), increased dose  
used in severe infection
4.3.2 Second choice antimicrobial18
The second choice antimicrobial is either metronidazole or a macrolide, e.g. clarithromycin, 
which offers improved pharmacokinetics and toleration compared to erythromycin.  
 Metronidazole can be used:
•	 As	a	first	line	treatment	for	patients	allergic	to	a	penicillin;	or
•	 As	a	first	line	treatment	for	patients	who	have	had	a	recent	course 	 
of a penicillin for another infection; or
•	 As	an	 adjunct to a penicillin in severe spreading infections
•	 If 	a	predominantly	anaerobic	infection	is	suspected	or	microbiologically	proven
--- Page 31 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
21
Clarithromycin can be used:
•	 As	a	first	line	treatment	for	patients	allergic	to	a	penicillin
•	 As	a	first	line	treatment	for	patients	who	have	had	a	recent	course	of 	a	penicillin
METRONIDAZOLE
Adults
400mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days 
Intravenous infusion for hospital inpatients
500mg every 8 hours to be given over 20 minutes
Children
•	 1-2 years: 50mg orally every 8 hours for up to 5 days
•	 3-6 years: 100mg orally every 12 hours for up to 5 days
•	 7-9 years: 100mg orally every 8 hours for up to 5 days
•	 10-17 years: 200-250mg orally every 8 hours for up to 5 days
Intravenous infusion for hospital inpatients
2 months-17 years: 7.5mg/kg every 8 hours (max. per dose 500mg)
CLARITHROMYCIN
Adults
250mg orally twice a day for up to 5 days, increasing to 500mg twice a day 
in severe infections
Intravenous infusion for hospital inpatients
500mg every 12 hours to be administered in large proximal vein, 
switch to oral route when appropriate 
continued on next page
--- Page 32 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
22
Children
•	 1 month-11 years (body-weight 12-19kg): 125mg orally twice a day 
 up to 5 days
•	 1 month-11 years (body-weight 20-29kg): 187.5mg orally twice a day 
 up to 5 days
•	 1 month-11 years (body-weight 30-40kg): 250mg orally twice a day 
 up to 5 days
•	 12-17 years: 250mg orally twice a day for up to 5 days, increasing to 
 500mg twice a day in severe infections
4.3.3 Other antimicrobials available for dento-alveolar infections
Clindamycin has effective antimicrobial activity against oral anaerobes.12 In prospective 
randomised controlled trials, it has been shown that the clinical results using clindamycin 
were similar to those with penicillin for treatment of acute dental abscesses.19,20
A higher rate of adverse gastrointestinal effects and diarrhoea has been reported 
in association with clindamycin treatment20 and it is well documented that there is 
an increased risk of Clostridium difficile infections with clindamycin. The significant 
morbidity/mortality associated with Clostridium difficile is an important risk that 
should be included in consent when prescribing clindamycin.
Clindamycin, however, may be the only antimicrobial of choice due to allergy or  
drug interactions for some individual patients.
Co-amoxiclav (amoxicillin and clavulanic acid) is active against beta-lactamase 
producing bacteria that are resistant to amoxicillin. The BNF suggests that it may be 
used for a severe spreading infection with spreading cellulitis and where the infection 
is not responding to first line antimicrobials.18 Co-amoxiclav should only be used in 
patients likely to be managed in secondary care. 
 
A systematic review looked at harms associated with amoxicillin or co-amoxiclav in 
randomised placebo-controlled trials.21 Although harms were poorly reported, and 
--- Page 33 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
23
the true incidence was likely to have been higher, diarrhoea was only reported for 
co-amoxiclav and candidosis for both amoxicillin and co-amoxiclav. The number of 
courses of co-amoxiclav needed to harm was 10 for diarrhoea. The number of courses 
of both amoxicillin and co-amoxiclav needed to harm was 27 for candidiasis.21
Cephalosporins have been used for oral infections but they offer no advantage over  
a penicillin in dental infections and are less active against anaerobes.
CLINDAMYCIN
Adults
150-300mg orally four times a day increased if necessary to 450mg every 
6 hours in severe infections for up to 5 days
Children
3-6mg/kg orally 4 times a day (max dose 450mg) for up to 5 days
CO-AMOXICLAV
Adults
500/125mg orally every 8 hours for severe infections for 5 days
Children
12-17 years: 500/125mg orally every eight hours for severe infections for 5 days
Intravenous injection or infusion for hospital inpatients
Adults
1.2g every eight hours
Children
3 months-17 years: 30mg/kg every 8 hours (max dose 1.2g every 8 hours)
--- Page 34 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
24
RECOMMENDATION
The routine prescribing of clindamycin, cephalosporins or co-amoxiclav for 
dental infections is not recommended and should only be at the direction 
of a specialist in oral/medical microbiology or infectious diseases
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
References
1 Matthews DC, Sutherland S, Basrani B. Emergency management of acute periapical abscesses  
in the permanent dentition. J Can Dent Assoc. 2003;69(10):660.
2 Cope AL, Francis N, Wood F, et al. Systemic antibiotics for symptomatic apical periodontitis and  
acute apical abscess in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2018:(9);CD010136. 
3 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. 
[Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain. 
4 Martin MV, Longman LP, Hill JB, et al. Acute dento-alveolar infections: an investigation of the 
duration of antibiotic therapy. Br Dent J. 1997;183(4):135-7
5 Ellison SJ. An outcome audit of three antimicrobial prescribing for the acute dentoalveolar abscess. 
BR Dent J. 2011;(211):591-594.
6 DeAngelis AF, Barrowman RA, Harrod R, et al. Review Article: Maxillofacial emergencies: oral pain 
and odontogenic infections. Emerg Med Australas. 2014;26:336-342.
7 Moore UJ. (Ed.) Principles of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. 6th ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2011.
8 Britt JC, Josephson GD, Gross CW. Ludwig’s angina in the pediatric patient: report of a case and  
review of the literature. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2000;52(1):79-87.
9 Public Health England (PHE). Start smart then focus: antimicrobial stewardship toolkit for English 
hospitals. [Internet]. London: PHE; 2015. Available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
antimicrobial-stewardship-start-smart-then-focus.
10 Martins JR, Chagas OL, Velasques BD, et al. The use of antibiotics in odontogenic infections:  
What is the best choice? A systematic review. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2017;(75):2606.e1-2606.e11.
11 Kuriyama T, Absi EG, Williams DW, et al. An outcome audit of the treatment of acute dentoalveolar 
infection: impact of penicillin resistance. Br Dent J. 2005;(198):759-763.
12 Kuriyama T, Williams DW, Yanagisawa M, et al. Antimicrobial susceptibility of 800 anaerobic 
isolates from patients with dentoalveolar infection to 13 oral antibiotics. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 
2007;(22):285-8 
13 Siqueira JF, Rocas IN. Microbiology and treatment of acute periapical abscesses. Clin Microbiol Rev. 
2013;26(2):255-273.
14 Heim N, Faron A, Weidemeyer V, et al. Microbiology and antibiotic sensitivity of head and neck  
space infections of odontogenic origin. Differences in inpatient and outpatient management.  
J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2017;(45):1731-35.
15 Dawson-Han EE, Mickan S, Onakpoya I, et al. Short-course versus long-course oral antibiotic 
treatment for infections treated in outpatient settings: a review of systematic reviews. Family 
Practice. 2017;34(5);511-9.
16 Paterson SA, Curzon ME. The effect of amoxycillin versus penicillin V in the treatment of acutely 
abscessed primary teeth. Br Dent J. 1993;174(12):443-9.
--- Page 35 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
25
17 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Key therapeutic topic [KTT9]. 
Antimicrobial stewardship: prescribing antibiotics. [Internet]. London: NICE; 2019. Available  
at https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/ktt9.
18 Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary. 77th ed. [Internet]. London: BMJ Group and 
Pharmaceutical Press; 2019. Available at http://www.medicinescomplete.com. The reader is reminded 
that the BNF is constantly revised; for the latest guidelines please consult the current edition at www.
medicinescomplete.com.
19 Gilmore WC, Jacobus NV, Gorbach SL, et al. A prospective double-blind evaluation of penicillin versus 
clindamycin in the treatment of odontogenic infections. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 1988;(46):1065-1070. 
20 von Konow L, Kondell PA, Nord CE, et al. Clindamycin versus phenoxymethylpenicillin in the 
treatment of acute orofacial infections. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 1992;(11):1129-35.
21 Gillies M, Ranakusuma A, Hoffman T, et al. Common harms from amoxicillin: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomised placebo-controlled trials for any indication. CMAJ. 2015;187(1): E21-35.
--- Page 36 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
26
--- Page 37 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
27
CHRONIC DENTAL INFECTIONS5
5.1 CHRONIC DENTO-ALVEOLAR INFECTIONS
Chronic dento-alveolar infections occur as a result of decayed or restored teeth, or 
periodontal-endodontic lesions with a longstanding minor well-localised abscess 
contained by the host immune system. These infections sometimes spontaneously 
drain through a sinus tract which can be either intra- or extraoral. 
It is generally accepted that definitive dental treatment to remove the cause leads to 
resolution. Case reports and a review of the literature show that removal of the cause 
of the infection normally resolves the infection and extraoral cutaneous sinus tracts 
heal spontaneously.1,2 
Longstanding chronic infections that fail to respond to treatment are indicative of 
a more serious problem, e.g. osteomyelitis. These patients should be referred for 
specialist management.
Antimicrobial therapy is rarely required unless:
•	 There	is	an	acute	flare-up	and	there	is	evidence	of 	severe	local	spread,	or
•	 There	is	systemic	involvement	shown	by	raised	temperature	and	malaise
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are not recommended for chronic dento-alveolar infections 
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
--- Page 38 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
28
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Remove the cause by extraction, root canal therapy or surgical endodontics
•	 If 	acute	flare-up,	assess	and	manage	in	line	with	recommendations	for	
 acute infections (see chapter 4)
•	 If 	there	is	no	resolution,	refer	for	specialist/secondary	care	management
5.2 OSTEOMYELITIS
Osteomyelitis (OM) is an infection in the bone which usually affects the mandible.  
It is the result of bacterial infection of odontogenic origin or trauma causing bone 
death and necrosis. 
It may be acute or chronic and two main types of OM are described in the  
literature. The suppurative variants have the presence of pus and/or fistulas and/or 
sequestrations, distinguishing them from the non-suppurative variants, which  
are chronic inflammatory processes of unknown aetiology.3
These patients require a comprehensive clinical assessment in secondary care,  
including blood investigations, microbiological cultures from bone lesions, radiographs, 
CT/CBCT and MRI scans to rule out differential diagnoses, e.g. bone tumours.
Patients generally present with: 
•	 Deep-seated	throbbing	pain
•	 Swelling	(initially	soft	because	of 	oedema,	later	firm	with	involvement	 
of the periosteum)
•	 Non-healing	necrotic	bone
•	 Sequestrum	formation
•	 Trismus
•	 Fever
•	 Halitosis
•	 Extraoral	draining	sinuses
•	 Lymphadenopathy
--- Page 39 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
29
The evidence for management of osteomyelitis is based on case reports, cohort  
studies, reviews and expert consensus.
A literature review of case studies reported management with antimicrobials with 
a duration varying from 2 weeks to 6 weeks, usually starting with intravenous 
antimicrobials followed by a variable period of oral antimicrobials.3 A number of 
different antimicrobials were used in the studies with successful outcomes, indicating  
the varying and dynamic nature of the bacterial species in OM.
A multicentre parallel group randomised study showed that in patients who had 
surgery	for	bone	infections	and	IV	antimicrobials	for	<7days,	there	was	no	clinical	
advantage	of	prolonged	IV	antimicrobials	compared	to	oral	antimicrobials.4 
Antimicrobial treatment should be based on the identification of pathogens from  
bone cultures at the time of bone biopsy or debridement, and on local guidelines. 
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are recommended for the management of osteomyelitis 
as an adjunct to surgical debridement 
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Comprehensive	clinical	assessment
•	 Radiographs,	CT/CBCT	and	MRI	scans
•	 Microbiological	sampling,	culturing	and	antimicrobial	sensitivity	testing
•	 Removal	of 	necrotic	bone/sequestrum
•	 Surgical	debridement 	
•	 Initially	prescribe	IV	antimicrobials	followed	by	oral	antimicrobials	until 	
 resolution
continued on next page
--- Page 40 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
30
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	analgesics	to	control	pain	 (see NICE clinical knowledge 
 summary, Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain5) 
•	 Review	until	resolution
5.3 MEDICATION RELATED OSTEONECROSIS OF THE JAW (MRONJ)
MRONJ is where exposed necrotic bone in the maxillofacial region has persisted for 
more than 8 weeks in a patient who is, or has, undergone treatment with antiresorptive 
or antiangiogenic agents without current or previous radiotherapy to the area. The 
exposed necrotic bone may occur spontaneously or following dento-alveolar surgery. 
Intraoral and extraoral fistulae may develop when the necrotic mandible or maxilla 
becomes secondarily infected. 
The evidence for management is based solely on case series or cohort studies.6,7 The 
empiric treatment suggested consists of conservative non-surgical palliative care, control 
of associated infection and surgical intervention based on staging of the condition.
A Cochrane systematic review found only one RCT on management of MRONJ. This 
investigated hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) treatment used in addition to antiseptic rinses, 
antimicrobials and surgery. HBO did not significantly improve healing of MRONJ  
empiric treatment.8 
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are recommended for MRONJ where secondary bacterial 
infection is present
Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Remove	sources	of 	irritation/trauma
•	 Ensure	good	oral	hygiene
continued on next page
--- Page 41 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
31
•	 Consideration	must	be	given	to	why	the	MRONJ	has	occurred.	If 	it	is	
 associated with terminal metastatic cancer, a very conservative approach 
 to management is appropriate
•	 Microbiological	sampling,	culture	and	antimicrobial	sensitivity	testing
•	 Prescribe	antimicrobial	oral	rinses 	
•	 Prescribe	appropriate	antimicrobials	where	infection	is	evident
•	 Surgical	debridement	of 	sequestra	(with	care)	with	non-responsive	lesions
•	 Review
5.4 OSTEORADIONECROSIS (ORN)
Osteoradionecrosis (ORN) is a sequela of radiation therapy in head and neck cancer 
patients. Currently, there is no gold standard treatment of ORN and no widely accepted 
guidelines exist due to a lack of good evidence.
A literature review showed that early-stage ORN can be treated conservatively with 
antimicrobials and meticulous oral hygiene, as for MRONJ. Any sign of progression 
may require early surgical intervention with debridement and mucosal flaps to cover 
exposed bone.9 
The role of HBO treatment and medical management (antifibrotics, antioxidants, 
steroids) is yet to be defined with robust clinical trials. Extensive surgical resection  
with microvascular free flap reconstruction may be indicated in some patients with 
very advanced ORN and persistent symptoms despite conservative treatments.
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are recommended to control secondary bacterial infections 
associated with early stage osteoradionecrosis
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
--- Page 42 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
32
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Remove	any	possible	sources	of 	irritation/trauma,	e.g.	denture
•	 Perform	minor	debridement,	eliminating	sharp	bone	edges,	sharp	tooth 	
 surfaces
•	 Advise	patient	to	maintain	local	hygiene	of 	the	area	of	exposed	bone	
 with topical antimicrobial agents
•	 Microbiological	sampling,	culture	and	antimicrobial	sensitivity	testing
•	 Prescribe	appropriate	antimicrobial 	
•	 Conservative	bone	sequestromy	may	be	required	in	extensive	cases 	
•	 Surgical	removal	of 	large	areas	of	necrotic	bone	may	be	required	
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	analgesics	to	control	pain	and	fever	 (see NICE clinical 
 knowledge summary, Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain5) 
5.5 ANTIMICROBIAL DRUG OF CHOICE
Antimicrobials are prescribed either empirically based on the microbiology of the 
associated dental infection and antimicrobial sensitivity established in the literature, or in 
the case of osteomyelitis, MRONJ and ONJ, based on the results of microbial susceptibility 
testing and any local prescribing guidelines. See section 4.3 for antimicrobial regimens.
References
1 Barrowman RA, Rahimi M, Evans MD, et al. Cutaneous sinus tracts of dental origin. Med J Aus, 2007;186(5):264-5.
2  Swales KL, Rudralingham M, Gandhi S. Extraoral cutaneous sinus tracts of dental origin in the paediatric 
patient. A report of three cases and a review of the literature. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2016;(26):391-400.
3 Gudmundsson T, Torkov P, Thygesen TH. Diagnosis and treatment of osteomyelitis of the jaw-A 
systematic review (2002-2015) of the literature. J Dent Oral Disord. 2017;3(4):1066.
4 Li HK, Rombach I, Zambellas R, et al. Oral versus Intravenous antibiotics for bone and joint infection.   
N Engl J Med. 2019;(380):425-36.
5 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. 
[Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain.
6 Khan AA, Morrison A, Hanley DA, et al. Diagnosis and management of osteonecrosis of the jaw:  
a systemic review and international consensus. J Bone Miner res. 2015;30(1):3-23.
7 Rupel K, Ottaviani G, Gobbo M, et al. A systematic review of therapeutic approaches to 
bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ). Oral Oncol. 2014;50(11):1049-57. 
8 Rollason V, Laverrière A, MacDonald LCI, et al. Interventions for treating bisphosphonate-related 
osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2016(2):CD008455. 
9 Rice N, Polyzois I, Ekanayake K, et al. Management of osteoradionecrosis of the jaws – A review.  
The Surgeon. 2015;(13):101-9.
--- Page 43 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
33
PERICORONITIS6
Pericoronitis is inflammation and infection of the soft tissues around a partially 
erupted tooth, usually an impacted mandibular third molar. There is no evidence-
based guidance for the clinical management of pericoronitis. It is generally accepted, 
in line with the management of acute dental infections, that local inflammation and 
infection is managed with local measures, such as removal of the cause (extraction  
or operculectomy), incision and drainage where necessary. 
Where there is evidence of systemic spread, e.g. elevated temperature, severe  
localised swelling, cellulitis or trismus, antimicrobials should be provided as an  
adjunct to local measures.1
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are only recommended for pericoronitis as an adjunct 
to local measures where there is evidence of systemic spread (elevated 
temperature), severe generalised swelling, cellulitis or severe localised 
swelling and trismus
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Debride	and	irrigate	pericoronal	space	with	sterile	solution,	e.g.	saline
•	 Incision	and	drainage	if 	localised	abscess
•	 Consider	operculectomy
continued on next page
--- Page 44 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
34
•	 Occlusal	adjustment	to	relieve	occlusion	or	extract	opposing	tooth	if 	
	 traumatising	any	inflamed	pericoronal	tissues
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	the	use	of 	analgesics	(see NICE clinical knowledge 
 summary, Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain2) 
•	 Advise	the	use	of 	warm	salty	mouthwashes
•	 Prescribe	appropriate	antimicrobials	in	the	presence	of 	severe	local	
 disease or if systemic symptoms identified
•	 Extract	impacted	tooth,	if 	there	has	been	more	than	one	episode,	once	
 infection under control (see NICE Guidance on the Extraction of Wisdom 
 Teeth [TA1])3 
•	 Complex	dentofacial	infections	arising	from	pericoronitis	require	urgent 	
 surgical management (see section 4.3) 
An algorithm for the clinical management of pericoronitis is shown in Figure 6.1 
--- Page 45 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
35
Figure 6.1 Algorithm for clinical management of pericoronitis
6.1 ANTIMICROBIAL DRUGS OF CHOICE
Two systematic reviews suggested that there is no evidence to recommend one 
antimicrobial over another in the management of odontogenic infections.1,4
Antimicrobials are usually prescribed where indicated, either empirically or  
based on microbiological studies of pericoronitis infections. Two microbiological 
studies of pericoronitis infections found that no causative species could be  
Pericoronitis
Debridement, irrigation –  
consider relieving occlusion/
operculectomy
Elevated temperature, severe  
generalised swelling or cellulitis, or  
severe localised swelling and trismus
Recurrent infection
Prescribe antimicrobials  
and review
Extract the impacted tooth or
refer to oral surgery specialist  
or maxillofacial surgeon
--- Page 46 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
36
identified, but most isolates were obligate and facultative anaerobic bacteria.5,6
Metronidazole or amoxicillin, both effective against anaerobic bacteria, are recognised 
as suitable choices of antimicrobial as an adjunct to local measures where indicated.7
METRONIDAZOLE
Adults
400mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days8-9
Intravenous infusion for hospital inpatients
500mg every 8 hours to be given over 20 minutes
Children
10-17 years: 200-250mg orally every 8 hours for up to 5 days
Intravenous infusion for hospital inpatients
7.5mg/kg every 8 hours (max per dose 500mg)
Or
AMOXICILLIN 
Adults 
500mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days increased if necessary to 
1g every 8 hours in severe infections8-9 
Intravenous injection or infusion for hospital inpatients
500mg every 8 hours, increased to 1g every 6 hours, use increased dose 
in severe infections
Children
12-17 years: 500mg 3 times a day, increased if necessary up to 1g 3 times 
a day, use increased dose in severe infections
--- Page 47 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
37
References
1 Matthews DC, Sutherland S, Basrani B. Emergency management of acute periapical abscesses  
in the permanent dentition. J Can Dent Assoc. 2003;69(10):660.
2 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. 
[Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain. 
3 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Guidance on the Extraction of Wisdom 
Teeth: Technology appraisal guidance [TA1]. [Internet]. London: NICE; 2000. Available at https://  
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta1).
4 Martins JR, Chagas OL, Velasques BD, et al. The use of antibiotics in odontogenic infections:  
What is the best choice? A systematic review. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2017;(75):2606.e1-2606.e11.
5 Peltroche-Llacsahuanga H, Reichhart E, Schmitt W, et al. Investigation of infectious organisms 
causing pericoronitis of the mandibular third molar. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2000;(58):611-616.
6 Sixou JL, Magaud C, Jolivet-Gougeon A, et al. Microbiology of mandibular third molar pericoronitis: 
Incidence of β-lactamase-producing bacteria. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 
2003;(95):655-9.
7 Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary. 77th ed. [Internet]. London: BMJ Group  
and Pharmaceutical Press; 2019. Available at http://www.medicinescomplete.com. The reader is 
reminded that the BNF is constantly revised; for the latest guidelines please consult the current edition  
at www.medicinescomplete.com.
8 Martin MV, Longman LP, Hill JB, et al. Acute dento-alveolar infections: an investigation of the 
duration of antibiotic therapy. Br Dent J. 1997;183(4):135-7.
9 Ellison SJ. An outcome audit of three antimicrobial prescribing for the acute dentoalveolar  
abscess. Br Dent J. 2011;(211):591-594.
--- Page 48 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
38
--- Page 49 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
39
DRY SOCKET7
Dry socket or localised osteitis is a recognised complication following tooth extraction, 
with incidence rates of 1-4% with routine extractions, but a reported incidence of 25-
30% with impacted lower wisdom teeth.1
It occurs 3-4 days post-extraction and is self-limiting, lasting for up to 10 days.1,2 The 
aetiology is thought to be associated with surgical trauma, local infection, inadequate 
oral hygiene and poor aftercare.3
There are no RCTs comparing clinical outcomes of prescribing antimicrobials against 
no antimicrobials in the management of dry socket. In the absence of signs of a 
spreading infection, it is generally accepted that antimicrobials are contraindicated 
and management is centred around local measures.3 
A Cochrane systematic review found there was no evidence to support any 
interventions for the treatment of dry socket. It also reported that the number of 
patients needed to treat (NNT) with chlorhexidine to prevent one dry socket was 232.  
In view of this and reported cases of anaphylaxis, its preventive use for dry sockets  
is controversial.4
RECOMMENDATION 
Antimicrobials are not recommended for the management of dry socket 
in the absence of signs of a spreading infection
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
--- Page 50 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
40
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 If 	appropriate,	radiograph	to	exclude	a	foreign	body	or	retained	root
•	 Irrigate	with	sterile	solution,	e.g.	saline,	to	remove	debris
•	 Placing	a	suitable	dressing,	e.g.	Alvogyl®,	in	the	socket	may	relieve 	
 symptoms but can delay healing5,6
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	analgesics	 (see NICE clinical knowledge summary, 
 Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain7)  
•	 Advise	warm	salty	mouthwashes
•	 Review	the	patient	for	resolution
References
1 Vezeau PL. Dental extraction wound management: medicating post extraction sockets. J Oral 
Maxillofac Surg. 2000;58(5):531-7.
2 Blum IR. Contemporary views on dry socket (alveolar osteitis): a clinical appraisal of standardisation, 
aetiopathogenesis and management: a critical review. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2002 Jun;31(3):309-17. 
3 Noroozi A. Philbert RF. Modern concepts in understanding and management of the “dry socket” 
syndrome. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2009;(107):30-35. 
4 Daly B, Sharif MO, Newton T, et al. Local interventions for the management of alveolar osteitis  
(dry socket). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2012(12);CD006968. 
5 Kolokythas A, Olec E, Miloro M. Alveolar Osteitis: A comprehensive review of concepts and 
controversies. Int J Dent. 2010;(2010):249073.
6 Faizel S, Thomas S, Yuvaraj V, et al. Comparison Between Neocone, Alvogyl and Zinc Oxide  
Eugenol Packing for the Treatment of Dry Socket: A Double-Blind Randomised Control Trial.  
J. Maxillofac. Oral Surg. 2015;14(2):312-320. 
7 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. 
[Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain. 
--- Page 51 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
41
ACUTE SINUSITIS8
Most cases of acute sinusitis (also known as rhinosinusitis) are self-limiting and usually 
triggered by a viral infection of the upper respiratory tract. In the absence of a dental 
cause, these cases are best managed by the patient’s general medical practitioner. 
Acute sinusitis can be diagnosed by:
•	 Nasal	discharge
•	 Nasal	blockage	or	congestion
•	 Facial	pain	localised	over	the	affected	sinus	that	can	affect	the	teeth,	upper	jaw 	 
or eye, side of the face or forehead. Pain in the absence of other symptoms is 
unlikely to be sinusitis and a dental cause should be ruled out
•	 Loss	or	altered	sense	of 	smell
In its guideline for antimicrobial prescribing for acute sinusitis, NICE states that most 
cases of uncomplicated acute sinusitis resolve in 2-3 weeks and respond to watchful 
waiting and measures to relieve symptoms.1
Three systematic reviews and meta-analyses showed that antimicrobials, when 
compared with placebo, did not significantly increase cure or improve symptoms at 3-5 
days follow-up.2-4 At 7-15 days follow-up, there were statistically significant differences 
in effectiveness, but the clinical difference was small. Beyond 15 days there was no 
difference between antimicrobials and placebo in effectiveness.1 
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are not recommended for uncomplicated acute sinusitis 
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
--- Page 52 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
42
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Assess	whether	a	dental	cause	and	manage	appropriately
•	 Consider	paracetamol	or	ibuprofen	to	relieve	pain	and	fever 	
•	 Consider	suggesting	the	patient	try	nasal	saline	or	decongestant,	though 	
 there is little evidence to recommend their use1
•	 Adequate	fluids	and	rest
•	 Refer	if 	patient	presents	with	severe	symptoms,	is	systemically	unwell,	
 has symptoms and signs of a more serious illness or existing co-
 morbidities, e.g. immunosuppression, or significant heart, lung, renal, 
 liver or neuromuscular disease
References
1 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Sinusitis (acute): antimicrobial prescribing.  
[NG79]. [Internet]. London: NICE; 2017. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng79. 
2 Falagas ME, Giannopoulou KP, Vardakas KZ, et al. Comparison of antibiotics with placebo for treatment 
of acute sinusitis: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet Infect Dis. 2008;8(9):543-552.
3 Rosenfeld RM, Singer M, Jones S. Systematic review of antimicrobial therapy in patients with acute 
rhinosinusitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2007;137(3 Suppl);S32-S45.
4 Lemiengre MB, van Driel ML, Merenstein D, et al. Antibiotics for acute rhinosinusitis in adults. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2018(9):CD006089.
--- Page 53 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
43
BACTERIAL SIALADENITIS9
Sialadenitis is inflammation and swelling of the parotid, submandibular, sublingual  
or minor salivary glands. 
Acute bacterial sialadenitis is characterised by:
•	 Rapid	onset	of 	pain
•	 Swelling	and	elevated	temperature 	
•	 Cellulitis	and	induration	of 	the	adjacent	soft	tissues	may	be	present,	 
and rarely a cutaneous fistula
•	 Exudates	of 	pus	from	salivary	gland	opening
Chronic sialadenitis is characterised by intermittent, recurrent episodes of tender 
swelling, usually as a result of obstruction (stricture or calculus) of the duct which  
can be managed with local measures.
A clinical assessment of the patient (see chapter 3) should include palpation of the 
gland for the presence of calculi and examination of the ductal opening for purulence. 
Referral and management to a specialist is required in cases of acute infection, grossly 
elevated temperature and signs of airway compromise where microbiological culture 
of pus from the duct and blood cultures can be taken, along with an assessment of 
fluid and electrolyte balance. 
The most common bacterial cause of acute sialadenitis is Staphylococcus aureus,  
which	has	been	cultured	in	>	50%	of	cases.	Streptococcal	species,	Gram-negative	
bacteria and anaerobes are also common causes.1-3 
There is no good quality evidence on the management of bacterial sialadenitis.  
--- Page 54 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
44
As with acute dento-alveolar infections, accepted practice in the management of acute 
bacterial sialadentitis with systemic signs and symptoms is drainage of the abscess if 
present, removal of the cause and prescribing of antimicrobials.4 
Microbiological studies have shown that acute bacterial sialadenitis is polymicrobial 
in nature and includes S. aureus, oral streptococci and Gram-negative anaerobes with 
aerobic Gram-negative microbes, such as Klebsiella spp often recovered in hospital 
inpatients.5
There is no evidence of the efficacy of one antimicrobial or combination over another. 
Commentators and clinicians have suggested a number of antimicrobials based on the 
microbiology published in the literature.5
 A systematic review did find that intravenously administered cephalosporins achieved 
the highest concentrations in saliva, followed by orally administered cephalosporins 
and fluoroquinolones. In this study, it was suggested that beta-lactam antimicrobials, 
especially cephalosporins, are effective as first-line therapy in the conservative 
treatment of sialadenitis.6
RECOMMENDATIONS
Antimicrobials with local measures are recommended for acute bacterial 
sialadenitis
Strong recommendation, low evidence
Antimicrobials are not recommended for chronic sialadenitis which can 
be managed with local measures
Strong recommendation, very low evidence evidence
9.1 ANTIMICROBIAL REGIMENS
The BNF makes no recommendations for bacterial sialadenitis. Knowledge of prevalent 
organisms from microbiological studies and their current sensitivity should guide 
antimicrobial choice prior to culturing and bacteriological results. 
--- Page 55 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
45
Empirically, antimicrobial therapy in the hospital setting includes flucloxacillin and 
metronidazole, with addition of gentamycin where necessary, or a third generation 
cephalosporin for hospital in-patients. Clinicians should be aware of local policies/
formularies and seek advice from a clinical microbiologist.
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Institute	local	measures,	e.g.	hydration,	sialagogues,	gland	massage, 	
 oral hygiene instruction (OHI)
•	 Prescribe	analgesics	 (see NICE clinical knowledge summary, Analgesia – 
 mild-to-moderate pain7)  
•	 Refer	for	specialist	management	of 	acute	infection	with	systemic	signs	
 and symptoms
•	 Prescribe	antimicrobials	empirically	based	on	known	microbiology	for 	
 the acute infection, BUT adjust if necessary following culture and 
 sensitivity testing
•	 Review	acute	phase	24-48	hours
•	 Duct	evaluation	by	radiography,	ultra	sound	scan,	sialography,	CT 	
 scan following control of acute phase. Sialography can also provide 
 symptomatic relief in chronic sialadenitis
•	 Remove	the	source	of 	the	infection	
•	 Evaluate	the	need	for	sialendoscopy	or	open	surgery
An algorithm for clinical management is shown in Figure 9.1.
--- Page 56 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
46
Fig 9.1 Algorithm for clinical management of sialadenitis
Recurrent chronic sialadenitis 
(recurrent swelling, gland  
firmness due to stricture  
or sialolith or other gland 
pathology)
Acute bacterial sialadenitis  
(pain, swelling, fever)
Duct evaluation (plain 
radiography, ultra sound,  
CT, sialography)
Remove cause, establish  
drainage, prescribe  
antimicrobials and analgesia
Local measures
Needle aspiration, culture/
susceptibility
Antimicrobials + surgical  
drainage if necessary
Local measures (analgesics, 
sialagogues, 
hydration gland massage)
Review need for
surgery or sialendoscopy
Antimicrobials, analgesics  
and hydrationReview
--- Page 57 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
47
References
1 Brook I, Frazier EH, Thompson DH. Aerobic and anaerobic microbiology of acute suppurative 
parotitis. Laryngoscope. 1991;101(2):170-172.
2 Raad II, Sabbagh MF, Caranasos GJ. Acute bacterial sialadenitis: a study of 29 cases and review.  
Rev Infect Dis. 1990;12(4):591-601. 
3 Brook I. Aerobic and anaerobic microbiology of suppurative sialadenitis. J Med Microbiol. 
2002;(51):526. 
4 Wilson KF, Meier JD, Ward PD. Salivary gland disorders. Am Fam Physician. 2014;(89):882-888.
5 Brook I. Acute Bacterial Suppurative Parotitis: Microbiology and Management. J Craniofac Surg. 
2003;(14):37-40. 
6 Troeltzsch M, Pache C, Probst FA, et al. Antibiotic concentrations in saliva: A systematic review  
of the literature, with clinical implications for the treatment of sialadenitis. J Oral Maxillofac  
Surg. 2014;(72):67-75. 
7 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. 
[Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain. 
--- Page 58 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
48
--- Page 59 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
49
PERIODONTAL DISEASES10
10.1 GINGIVITIS
Gingivitis is an inflammatory response of the gingival tissues resulting from bacterial 
plaque accumulation at and below the gingival margin. A systematic review showed 
that mechanical plaque control procedures are effective in reducing plaque and 
gingivitis, and that an antimicrobial rinse has a positive effect on gingivitis.1 
RECOMMENDATION
Systemic antimicrobials are not recommended for the management of 
gingivitis
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Ensure	no	underlying	medical	or	nutritional	condition,	e.g.	leukaemia 	
 or vitamin C deficiency
•	 Provide	oral	hygiene	instruction
•	 Consider	antimicrobial	rinse
•	 Review	plaque	control
10.2 NECROTISING PERIODONTAL DISEASES
These are rare and include necrotising gingivitis, necrotising periodontitis and 
necrotising stomatitis. They are characterised by gingival necrosis and bleeding, 
pain and fetid breath. In severe cases, systemic signs and symptoms, such as 
lymphadenopathy, fever, and malaise may be present. 
--- Page 60 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
50
The possibility of compromised systemic health, smoking and/or stress should be 
investigated with the patient and managed if necessary, possibly in conjunction with 
the general medical practitioner.
Spirochetes, fusiforms and bacteroides have all been frequently cultivated from 
necrotising lesions, but a definitive periodontal pathogen is yet to be implicated.2 
A literature review showed that it is generally accepted that local therapeutic measures 
(scaling and polishing, OHI) with adequate pain control provide resolution of the acute 
phase of necrotising gingivitis.3
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are recommended only as an adjunct to local measures 
for necrotising periodontal disease where there is evidence of systemic 
involvement 
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
10.2.1 Antimicrobial drug choice
The antimicrobial of choice, where there is evidence of systemic involvement, 
is metronidazole due to the anaerobic nature of the infection. Amoxicillin is an 
alternative where metronidazole is contraindicated. 
METRONIDAZOLE
Adults
400mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days 
Children
10-17 years: 200-250mg orally every 8 hours for up to 5 days
Or (see next page)
--- Page 61 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
51
AMOXICILLIN 
Adults 
500mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days increased if necessary to 
1g every 8 hours in severe infections
Children
12-17 years: 500mg 3 times a day, increased if necessary up to 1g 
3 times a day, use increased dose in severe infections
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Provide	oral	hygiene	instruction
•	 Debridement	under	local	anaesthetic
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	analgesia	 (see NICE clinical knowledge summary, 
 Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain4)  
•	 Consider	recommending	an	antimicrobial	mouthwash
•	 Only	prescribe	antimicrobials	if 	evidence	of	systemic	involvement	
•	 Provide	or	refer	for	smoking	cessation	support	if 	indicated
•	 Review	for	further	treatment	and	maintenance,	consider	systemic	issues, 	
 especially in the presence of a limited response to treatment at review
10.3 PERIODONTITIS
The recent reclassification of periodontitis is based on staging (initial [I], moderate [II], 
severe	[III],	very	severe	[IV])	in	terms	of	interproximal	bone	loss	and	grading	(slow	[A],	
moderate [B], rapid [C]) progression in terms of percentage bone loss compared to 
patient age.5 
Patients with severe/very severe or rapidly progressing forms of periodontitis 
responding poorly to effective mechanical debridement and excellent patient  
oral hygiene should be referred for specialist management.
--- Page 62 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
52
10.3.1 Stage I, II, III; Grade A, B periodontitis or periodontitis 
           in any patient aged >40-45years 
It is accepted that it is possible to achieve satisfactory and stable outcomes from root 
surface debridement (RSD) combined with good patient oral hygiene in this group  
of patients.
10.3.1.1 Use of systemic antimicrobials 
A systematic review and meta-analysis compared non-surgical periodontal therapy  
with a wide range of systemic antimicrobials against non-surgical periodontal 
therapy alone in untreated chronic periodontitis.6 This review (of 43 studies) found 
that systemic antimicrobials showed a statistically significant additional pocket depth 
reduction, but the additional benefit was very small and the long-term clinical benefits 
not proven. Statistically, no specific type of antimicrobial or protocol was superior over 
another in this meta-analysis. Other studies, including a systematic review of systemic 
and local antimicrobials in the managment of chronic periodontitis and aggressive 
periodontitis, showed similar results.7,8
Clinicians should weigh up any very small short-term benefits of adjunctive systemic 
antimicrobial treatment against development of resistance and other unwanted side 
effects of antimicrobials, such as diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, thrush, gastrointestinal 
intolerance and antimicrobial hypersensitivity.9
RECOMMENDATION 
Systemic antimicrobials are not recommended as an adjunct to thorough 
and effective mechanical debridement for patients with periodontitis of 
slow or moderate progression, or in any patient with periodontitis aged 
>40-45 years
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
10.3.1.2 Use of topical/local antimicrobials
There are a range of local delivery antimicrobial systems available. Indications for their 
use are limited and should not be considered as a first-line periodontal treatment. 
--- Page 63 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
53
Local delivery antimicrobials are used as an adjunct to conventional subgingival 
debridement, and their effectiveness is controversial.
A recent Cochrane review showed no statistically significant improvement or long-
term benefit with adjunctive use of local antimicrobials in supportive periodontal 
treatment.10 A further study showed that these forms of adjunctive therapy are  
not cost effective.11
RECOMMENDATION
Locally delivered antimicrobials are not recommended as an adjunct to 
effective mechanical debridement in the management of periodontitis
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
10.3.1.3 Use of low dose (sub-antimicrobial) antimicrobials 
Low (sub-antimicrobial) dose doxycycline (SDD) is considered a host modulating agent 
inhibiting collagenase activity present in periodontitis. 
A systematic review and meta-analysis suggested, on the basis of 3 trials that included 
46 participants, that use of SDD for 3 months following RSD resulted in a very small 
extra reduction (~0.9mm) in pocket depth (PD); there was a small extra gain (~0.8mm) 
in clinical attachment level (CAL) compared to RSD alone after 9 months.12
A further systematic review and meta-analysis of 11 trials showed a very small gain in 
CAL (0.15-0.56mm).13 The long-term benefit of sub-antimicrobial antimicrobials in the 
management of periodontal disease is not proven. One study indicated that long-term 
SDD does not alter or contribute to alterations in the antimicrobial susceptibility of  
the subgingival microflora compared with a placebo.14
Clinicians need to weigh up the extremely limited clinical benefit against the known 
risks (diarrhoea, nausea, hypersensitivity, vomiting) of prescribing SDD, particularly  
if used in maintenance programmes.
--- Page 64 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
54
RECOMMENDATION
Sub-antimicrobial dose antimicrobials (e.g. doxycycline) are not 
recommended as an adjunct to thorough root surface debridement and 
excellent home care by periodontal patients
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Consider	medical	risk	factors,	e.g.	diabetes
•	 Provide	oral	hygiene	instruction
•	 Debridement	under	local	anaesthetic
•	 Consider	recommending	an	antimicrobial	mouthwash 	
•	 Provide	or	refer	for	smoking	cessation	support	if 	indicated
•	 Review	for	further	treatment	and	maintenance
•	 If 	isolated	site(s)	are	not	responding	to	RSD	despite	good	plaque	control,	
 referral to a specialist should be considered
10.3.2 Stage III, IV periodontitis Grade C in patients aged <40-45years
Following diagnosis in primary care, dentists should consider referral of these patients 
to a periodontal specialist for management.
In this group of patients (where periodontal disease is advanced and progressing 
rapidly), the use of systemic antimicrobials as an adjunct to mechanical debridement 
and oral hygiene instruction has been investigated in a number of RCTs.
Systematic reviews have demonstrated that adjunctive use (to root surface debridement) 
of systemic antimicrobials can result in greater PD reductions and gains in CAL 
compared to just root surface debridement alone.6-9
 
In a systematic review and Bayesian network meta-analysis, 9 out of 11 RCT  
studies showed a statistically significant small gain (~1mm) in CAL and small  
reduction (~1mm) in PD when systemic antimicrobials (metronidazole or 
--- Page 65 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
55
metronidazole + amoxicillin) were used as an adjunct to RSD compared to RSD  
alone. This study also showed very limited improvements when systemic doxycycline 
was used as an adjunct to RSD.15
A further placebo-controlled RCT showed that both 3 and 7 day regimens produced 
similar reductions in PD and CAL gain with adjunctive amoxicillin and  
metronidazole.16
All studies show a variety of regimens (dose/duration/frequency) for the antimicrobials 
used as an adjunct to RSD. There is no direct evidence to support a specific regimen  
or protocol for adjunctive systemic antimicrobials with RSD.7,8,15
It has been suggested that locally undisrupted biofilm affects the efficacy of systemic 
antimicrobials, and that they should be commenced at the earliest on the day RSD 
is started. Current expert consensus is that antimicrobials should be prescribed at the 
end of a thorough course of RSD, and that such instrumentation therapy should be 
completed within a week or less.9
The benefits of adjunctive systemic antimicrobials at initial therapy were significant 
compared to those who had antimicrobials at re-treatment in a randomised placebo-
controlled, parallel design, double-blind clinical trial.17
A systematic review of the effectiveness of systemic antimicrobial therapy noted that 
nearly all of the studies reported adverse effects (e.g. gastrointestinal discomfort, 
diarrhoea, nausea) associated with medication.9
Clinicians should weigh up the benefits and risks, both at an individual and general 
population level, when deciding to prescribe systemic antimicrobials as an adjunct  
to thorough and effective mechanical debridement. 
--- Page 66 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
56
RECOMMENDATION
Systemic antimicrobials are only recommended as an adjunct to effective 
mechanical debridement, oral hygiene instruction and management 
of modifiable risk factors in patients aged <40-45 years with rapidly 
progressing periodontal disease 
Conditional recommendation, moderate quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Identify	and	manage	risk	factors,	e.g.	smoking
•	 RSD	+	OHI
•	 Consider	adjunctive	antimicrobials
•	 Review 	
•	 Consider	periodontal	surgery/regenerative	surgery
•	 Regular	reviews	and	maintenance	programme
10.3.3 Antimicrobial drug choice
The choice of antimicrobial in the management of periodontal diseases is empiric, 
guided by information about the nature of the involved pathogenic microorganism(s) 
and/or their antimicrobial susceptibility profile. The microbial flora and level of 
pathogenic species differ for patient and site but is usually associated with anaerobes. 
10.3.3.1 First choice antimicrobial
Experts agree that the antimicrobial regimen for treatment of Stage 3,4 Grade C is a 
combination of amoxicillin with metronidazole.18 In a placebo-controlled randomised 
study comparing 3 or 7 day antibiotic regimens with RSD only, both led to a significantly 
greater clinical improvement.16 A shorter-duration regimen reduces potential side 
effects and selective resistance. 
--- Page 67 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
57
AMOXICILLIN
Adults 
500mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days 
Children
12-17 years: 500mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days
METRONIDAZOLE
Adults
400mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days
Children
12-17 years: 400mg orally three times a day for up to 5 days
10.3.3.2 Second choice antimicrobial
The second choice is a macrolide, e.g. azithromycin. This is normally used as an 
alternative to a penicillin. Azithromycin has been reported to give adjunctive benefits 
in Grade C cases, particularly at deeper sites.19 Azithromycin is thought to have some 
host-modulatory effects.20
AZITHROMYCIN
Adults
500mg orally once a day for 3 days
Children
•	 12-17 years (body weight 36-45kg): 400mg orally once a day for 3 days
•	 12-17 years (body weight 46kg and over): 500mg orally once a day for 3 days
--- Page 68 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
58
10.3.3.3 Other antimicrobials
Doxycycline has been suggested to have higher availability in the gingival crevice, 
significantly active against Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitan and has host-
modulating properties. A review by Herrera et al. showed doxycycline had mixed  
but inferior results compared to other antimicrobials.8 
DOXYCYLINE
Adults and children 12-17 years
100mg orally twice a day for the first day then once a day for up to 5 days
10.4 PERIODONTAL ABSCESS
The majority of uncomplicated swellings of periodontal origin can be successfully 
treated by removing the source of the infection. This can be achieved by drainage of 
the associated abscess (ideally by RSD via the pocket) or by extraction of the tooth.21
Antimicrobials are only indicated as an adjunct to definitive treatment where there 
is an elevated temperature, evidence of systemic spread and local lymph node 
involvement.21
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are only recommended as an adjunct to definitive 
treatment for periodontal abscesses where there is an elevated temperature, 
evidence of systemic spread and local lymph node involvement
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
For management options see chapter 4.
10.5 PERI-IMPLANT DISEASE
Peri-implant disease is thought to be due to inflammation as a result of biofilm 
formation following bacterial colonisation of the oral implant and restoration surfaces. 
--- Page 69 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
59
It has been associated with predominantly Gram-negative anaerobic microflora.22
10.5.1 Peri-implant mucositis
Peri-implant mucositis is inflammation around the soft tissues of the dental implant, 
with no signs of bone loss. Generally, peri-implant mucositis if untreated leads to  
peri-implantitis. 
Two RCTs showed no benefit of adjunctive antimicrobial therapy with mechanical 
therapy.23,24 A systematic review of 11 RCTs showed that professionally and patient-
administrative mechanical plaque control alone reduces bleeding on probing (BOP)  
and should be considered the standard of care.25
RECOMMENDATION
Systemic or local antimicrobials are not recommended for peri-implant 
mucositis, local measures to improve self-performed oral hygiene are the 
treatment of choice
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Assess	BOP	and	pocket	depth
•	 Provide	appropriate	OHI	and	ensure	that	prosthesis	facilitates	this
•	 Mechanical	debridement
•	 Prescribe	antimicrobial	mouthwash	(very	weak	evidence)
•	 Review
10.5.2 Peri-implantitis
Peri-implantitis is an inflammatory disease of the soft tissues surrounding an implant, 
accompanied by bone loss and multifactorial pathogenesis.
In a Cochrane review, 9 RCTs using different treatment modalities were investigated. 
One of the RCTs compared metronidazole gel inserted into the pocket against 
--- Page 70 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
60
ultrasonic debridement. There was no significant difference in pocket depth between 
the groups.26
A further review of management of peri-implantitis failed to identify a clear benefit  
of any particular antimicrobial regimen over others or a control in the management  
of peri-implantitis.27
One RCT study compared azithromycin + RSD with RSD alone. It reported that the  
use of a 3 day azithromycin course resulted in a very slight statistical improvement  
in probing depth (~1mm) for 12 months.28 
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are not recommended as an adjunct to local management 
of peri-implantitis
Conditional recommendation, very low evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Assess	BOP ,	pocket	depth,	bone	loss	and	stability	of	the	implant
•	 Assess	short/long	term	prognosis	of 	the	implant
•	 Mechanical	debridement	+	OHI
•	 Stabilise	periodontal	disease	elsewhere
•	 Consider	surgical	management	in	the	presence	of 	bone	loss	
•	 Review
10.5.3 Apical peri-implantitis, retrograde peri-implantitis
This is a clinically symptomatic periapical lesion that develops shortly after implant 
insertion, while the coronal portion of the implant achieves a normal bone to implant 
interface.29 A number of factors, which may all be related to infection, are believed to 
predispose to this condition.
No RCT studies have investigated the use of antimicrobials with or without a surgical 
--- Page 71 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
61
approach. A number of case reports have shown that systemic antimicrobials alone can 
be successful,30 and that complete resolution cannot be achieved without a surgical 
approach because of the difficulties in eradicating bacterial colonies from the lesion.31
In the absence of clear evidence, and in line with AMS, it would be difficult to justify 
the prescribing of antimicrobials for this condition.
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials alone, or as an adjunct to surgical management for the 
treatment of apical peri-implantitis, are not recommended
Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Attempt	to	identify	the	likely	cause	based	on	status	of 	the	surgical	site,	
 placement and technique, and medical history of patient
•	 Manage	conservatively	or	surgically	on	a	case	by	case	basis
10.5.4 Antimicrobial drug choice
In the extremely rare situation where antimicrobials may be required for peri-implant 
diseases, see section 10.3.3.
References
1 Figuero E, Nobrega DF, Garcia-Gargallo M, et al. Mechanical and chemical plaque control 
in the simultaneous control of gingivitis and caries: a systematic review. J Clin Periodontol. 
2017;44(Suppl18):S116-S134.
2 Loesche WJ, Syed SA, Laughton BE, et al. The bacteriology of acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.  
J Periodontol. 1982;53(4):223-30.
3 Dufty J, Gkranias N, Donos N. Necrotising ulcerative gingivitis: A literature review. Oral Health  
Prev Dent. 2017;15(4):321-327.
4 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. 
[Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain. 
5 Caton JG, Armitage G, Berglundh T, et al. A new classification scheme for periodontal and peri-
implant diseases and conditions – Introduction and key changes from the 1999 classification.  
J Clin Periodontol. 2018;(45):(Suppl 20);1-8.
--- Page 72 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
62
6 Keestra JA, Grosjean I, Coucke W, et al. Non-surgical periodontal therapy with systemic antibiotics in 
patients with untreated chronic periodontitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Periodontal 
Res. 2015; 50(3):294-314. 
7 Herrera D, Sanz M, Jepsen S, et al. A systematic review on the effect of systemic antimicrobials as an 
adjunct to scaling and root planing in periodontitis patients. J Clin Periodontol. 2002;29(Suppl 3):136-159. 
8 Herrera D, Alonso B, Leon R, et al. Antimicrobial therapy in periodontitis: the use of systemic 
antimicrobials against the subgingival biofilm. J Clin Periodontol. 2008;35(8 Suppl):45-66.
9 Canas PG, Khouly I, Sanz J, Loomer PM. Effectiveness of systemic antimicrobial therapy in 
combination with scaling and root planing in the treatment of periodontitis – A systematic review. 
JADA. 2015:146(3):150-163.
10 Manresa C, Sanz-Miralles EC, Twigg J, Bravo M. Supportive periodontal therapy (SPT) for maintaining  
the dentition in adults treated for periodontitis (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 
2018(1):CD009376.
11 Heasman PA, Vernazza CR, Gaunt FL, et al. Cost-effectiveness of adjunctive antimicrobials in the 
treatment of periodontitis. Periodontol 2000. 2011;(5):217-23.
12 Sgolastra F, Petrucci A, Gatto R, et al. Long-Term Efficacy of Subantimicrobial-Dose Doxycycline  
as an Adjunctive Treatment to Scaling and Root Planing: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.  
J Periodontol. 2011;(82):1570-158.
13 Smiley CJ, Tracy SL, Michalowicz BS, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis on nonsurgical 
treatment of chronic periodontitis by means of scaling and root planning with and without adjuncts. 
JADA. 2015:146(7):508-524. 
14 Thomas J, Walker C, Bradshaw M. Long-Term Use of Subantimicrobial Dose Doxycycline Does  
Not Lead to Changes in Antimicrobial Susceptibility. J Periodontol. 2000;(71):1472-83. 
15 Rabelo CC, Feres M, Goncalves C, et al. Systemic antibiotics in the treatment of aggressive 
periodontitis. A systematic review and a Bayesian Network meta-analysis. J Clin Periodontol. 
2015;(42):647-657. 
16 Cosgarea R, Juncar R, Heumann C, et al. Non-surgical periodontal treatment in conjunction with 3 
or 7 days systemic administration of amoxicillin and metronidazole in severe chronic periodontitis 
patients. A placebo-controlled randomized clinical study. J Clin Periodontol. 2016;(43):767-777. 
17 Griffiths GS, Ayob R, Guerrero A, et al. Amoxicillin and metronidazole as an adjunctive treatment  
in generalized aggressive periodontitis at initial therapy or re-treatment: a randomized controlled  
clinical trial. J Clin Periodontol. 2011;(38):43-49.
18 Sgolastra F, Petrucci A, Gatto R, et al. Effectiveness of systemic amoxicillin/metronidazole as 
an adjunctive therapy to full-mouth scaling and root planing in the treatment of aggressive 
periodontitis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Periodontol. 2012;(83):731-743.
19 Haas AN, de Castro GD, Moreno T, et al. Azithromycin as an adjunctive treatment of aggressive 
periodontitis: 12-months randomized clinical trial. J Clin Periodontol, 2008;(35):696-704. 
20 Hirsch R, Deng H, Laohachai MN. Azithromycin in periodontal treatment: more than an antibiotic.  
J Periodont Res. 2012;(47):137-148. 
21 Matthews DC, Sutherland S, Basrani B. Emergency management of acute periapical abscesses  
in the permanent dentition. J Can Dent Assoc. 2003;69(10):660.
22 Mombelli A, Décaillet F. The characteristics of biofilms in peri-implant disease. J Clin Periodontol 
2011; 38(Suppl 11):203-13. 
23 Heitz-Mayfield LJ, Salvi GE, Botticelli D, et al. Anti-infective treatment of peri-implant mucositis:  
a randomised controlled clinical trial. Clin Oral Implants Res. 2011;(22):237-241. 
24 Hallstrom H, Persson GR, Lindgren S, et al. Systemic antibiotics and debridement of peri-implant 
mucositis. A randomized clinical trial. J Clin Periodontol. 2012;39(6):574-581.
--- Page 73 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
63
25 Salvi GE, Ramseier CA. Efficacy of patient-administered mechanical and/or chemical plaque control 
protocols in the management of peri-implant mucositis. A systematic review. J Clin Periodontol. 
2015;(42):(Suppl. 16): 187-201.
26 Esposito M, Grusovin MG, Worthington HV. Treatment of peri-implantitis: what interventions  
are effective? A Cochrane systematic review. Eur J Oral Implantol. 2012;5(Suppl):21-41. 
27 Heitz-Mayfield LJ, Mombelli A. The therapy of peri-implantitis: A systematic review. Int J Oral 
Maxillofac Implants. 2014; 29(Suppl):325-345.
28 Gomi K, Matsushima Y, Ujiie Y, et al. Full-mouth scaling and root planing combined with azithromycin  
to treat peri-implantitis. Aust Dent J. 2015;(60):503-510. 
29 Quirynen M, Vogels R, Alsaadi G, et al. Predisposing conditions for retrograde peri-implantitis,  
and treatment suggestions. Clin Oral Implants Res. 2005;16(5):599-608.
30 Waasdorp J, Reynolds M. Nonsurgical treatment of retrograde peri-implantitis: A case report.  
Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants. 2010;(25):831-833. 
31 Feller L, Jadwat Y, Chandran R, et al. Radiolucent Inflammatory Implant Periapical Lesions:  
A Review of the Literature. Implant Dent. 2014;23(6):745-752.
--- Page 74 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
64
--- Page 75 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
65
ENDODONTIC THERAPY11
11.1 ACUTE PULPITIS
Pulpitis is described as either ‘reversible’ or ‘irreversible’. With reversible pulpitis,  
the tooth may get better with time or by removal of the cause, or it may progress  
to irreversible pulpitis and necrosis of the pulp leading to an apical infection. 
Topical antimicrobials containing preparations (e.g. ledermix) have been used in  
the management of pulpitis. There is no good scientific evidence to support the  
use of topical antimicrobials over other obtundents in the management of pulpitis.  
The accepted standard of definitive care for irreversible pulpitis is extirpation of  
the pulp of the affected tooth or extraction. 
An RCT compared a placebo group to a group prescribed systemic penicillin for 
patients presenting with irreversible pulpitis. Antimicrobials did not significantly 
reduce toothache caused by irreversible pulpitis, and there was no reduction in  
the number of analgesics taken during the study period.1 This was a low-powered  
trial assessed as at low risk of bias in a Cochrane review.2 Ethical approval for  
more extensive trials is unlikely.
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are not recommended for acute pulpitis to prevent pain 
associated with pulpitis 
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
--- Page 76 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
66
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Provide	definitive	treatment	of 	the	cause
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	the	use	of 	analgesics (see NICE clinical knowledge 
 summary, Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain3) 
11.2 ACUTE AND CHRONIC PERIAPICAL INFECTIONS
Antimicrobials are not indicated in endodontic therapy (see chapters 4 and 5),  
unless there are signs of gross local spread of infection or evidence of systemic 
involvement. They are rarely indicated where drainage cannot be achieved 
immediately or treatment has to be delayed, e.g. for referral for peri-radicular surgery.
There is no indication for prophylactic antimicrobials before endodontic treatment  
to prevent endodontic flare-ups as shown with the use of amoxicillin in a prospective, 
double-blind and placebo-controlled RCT.4 Administration of penicillin postoperatively 
in a prospective, double-blind and placebo-controlled RCT did not significantly reduce 
pain, percussion pain, swelling, or the number of analgesic medications taken for 
symptomatic necrotic teeth with periapical radiolucencies.5
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are not recommended for most endodontic treatment 
(see recommendations in chapters 4 and 5). Antimicrobials are also not 
recommended to prevent postoperative pain, swelling or endodontic 
flare-ups
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 See	chapters	4	and	5	for	management	of 	infections
•	 Follow	existing	guidelines	on	endodontic	treatment,	e.g.	by	the	European 	
 Society of Endodontology6 
--- Page 77 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
67
11.3 REGENERATIVE ENDODONTIC PROCEDURES (REP)
Regenerative endodontic procedures (REPs) replace damaged tissues, including dentine, 
root structures and cells of the pulp-dentine complex.7 In immature teeth with open 
apices and necrotic pulps, REPs promote root development and apical closure.8
A recent narrative review of the literature suggests high success rates of REP when 
local antimicrobials (two or three antimicrobial combination) are used as intracanal 
dressings to achieve disinfection.9 There are no RCTs on the use and long term success  
of local antimicrobials against other methods available for REPs.8
The risks of using local antimicrobials for disinfection, such as discolouration from 
minocycline, cytotoxicity, sensitisation, difficulty of removal from the root canal, and 
more importantly, the development of resistance, should also be compared with  
using calcium hydroxide when weighing any benefit.
RECOMMENDATION
Local antimicrobials are not recommended for REPs 
Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence
11.4 TOOTH AVULSION
There are guidelines on the management of tooth avulsion which suggest that dentists 
should consider prescribing antimicrobials when re-implanting an avulsed tooth.10,11 
However, there are no indications for prescribing therapeutic antimicrobials in the absence 
of systemic infection (see section 4). For prophylactic prescribing of antimicrobials to 
prevent infection in the management of the avulsed tooth, see section 12.3.1.
RECOMMENDATION
Systemic therapeutic antimicrobials are not recommended when re-
implanting avulsed teeth in the absence of systemic infection
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
--- Page 78 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
68
CLINICAL ADVICE
See International Association for Dental Traumatology guidelines
(https://dentaltraumaguide.org/free-dental-guides/permanent-teeth/)10
•	 Full	medical	and	dental	history 	
•	 Comprehensive	clinical	assessment
•	 Assess	the	viability	and	prognosis	of 	re-implantation	(extraoral	dry	time,	
 extra-alveolar time, storage medium, root length, apical status) 
•	 Replant	the	tooth
•	 Splint 	
•	 OHI,	soft	diet 	
•	 Consider	antimicrobial	mouth	wash
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	the	use	of 	analgesics	(see NICE clinical knowledge 
 summary, Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain3) 
•	 Assess	the	need	for	tetanus 	
•	 Review	after	7-10	days 	
•	 Closed	apex:	begin	RCT	7-10	days	post-reimplantation
•	 Open	apex:	Monitor	vitality	and	RCT	if 	evidence	of	pulpal	necrosis
•	 Radiographic	review:	at	4	weeks,	3	months,	6	months,	1	year,	then 	
 annually
11.5 PERI-RADICULAR SURGERY 
There are clinical situations when non-surgical root canal retreatment is inappropriate 
and peri-radicular surgery is the treatment of choice. A wide range of success rates for 
surgical endodontics has been reported (44-95%).12
There are no indications for therapeutic antimicrobials in the absence of a systemic 
infection (see section 4). For prophylactic use of antimicrobials for peri-radicular 
surgery, see section 12.1.3.
--- Page 79 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
69
RECOMMENDATION
Therapeutic antimicrobials are not recommended for peri-radicular 
surgery in the absence of systemic infection
Strong recommendation, moderate evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Good	aseptic	surgical	technique
•	 Consider	antimicrobial	mouthwash
•	 Prescribe	or	advise	the	use	of 	analgesics (see NICE clinical knowledge 
 summary, Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain3) 
•	 Advise	cold	compresses	with	an	ice	pack	4-6	hours	after	surgery	to	reduce 	
 postoperative swelling
•	 Review	within	7	days
•	 Annual	radiographic	review	until	healing	is	observed
References 
1 Nagle D, Reader A, Beck M, et al. Effect of systemic penicillin on pain in untreated irreversible 
pulpitis. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2000;90(5):636-40.
2 Agnihotry A, Thompson W, Fedorowicz Z, et al. Antibiotic use for irreversible pulpitis. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews. 2019(5):CD004969. 
3 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. 
[Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain. 
4 Pickenpaugh L, Reader A, Beck M, et al. Effect of prophylactic amoxicillin on endodontic flare-up in 
asymptomatic, necrotic teeth. J Endod. 2001;27(1):53-6.
5 Henry M, Reader A, Beck M. Effect of penicillin on post operative endodontic pain and swelling in 
symptomatic necrotic teeth. J Endod. 2001;27(2);117-23.
6 European Society of Endodontology. Quality guidelines for endodontic treatment: consensus report 
of the European Society of Endodontology. Int Endodont J. 2006;(39):921-930. 
7 Murray PE, Garcia-Godoy F, Hargreaves KM. Regenerative endodontics: a review of current status  
and a call for action. J Endodont. 2007;(33):377-90.
8 Galler KM, Krastl G, Simon S, et al. European Society of Endodontology position statement: 
Revitalization procedures. Int Endodont J. 2016;(49):717-723.
9 Montero-Miralles P, Martín-González J, Alonso-Ezpeleta O, et al. Effectiveness and clinical 
implications of the use of topical antibiotics in regenerative endodontic procedures: a review.  
Int Endodont J. 2018;51(9):981-988.
10 Andersson L, Andreasen JO, Day P, et al. Guidelines for the management of traumatic dental injuries: 
2. Avulsion of Permanent Teeth. Pediatr Dent. 2017;39(6):412-419.
--- Page 80 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
70
11 British Society of Paediatric Dentistry (BSPD). UK National Clinical Guidelines in Paediatric  
Dentistry: Treatment of avulsed permanent incisor teeth in children. [Internet]. London: BSPD; 2017. 
Available at www.bspd.co.uk/Portals/0/Public/Files/Guidelines/avulsion_guidelines_v7_final_.pdf.
12 Friedman S. Treatment outcome and prognosis of endodontic therapy. In: Ørstavik D, Pitt Ford TR. 
(Eds.) Essential Endodontology. 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell Science; 2008.
--- Page 81 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
71
ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS   
– HEALTHY PATIENTS12
Antimicrobials have sometimes been prescribed to healthy patients for interventive 
dental procedures (IDPs) to prevent surgical site infections (SSIs), promote healing  
and reduce postoperative pain.
Antimicrobial prophylactic use remains a contentious issue in all surgical fields, 
particularly with the increasing development of antimicrobial resistance. Ideally, 
antimicrobials should reduce morbidity, but they can also cause adverse effects  
(e.g. allergy, toxicity) and increase colonisation resistance, resulting in infections  
with resistant micro-organisms.
12.1 MINOR ORAL SURGERY
12.1.1 Removal of impacted teeth, surgical extractions
A number of systematic reviews have concluded that there is no evidence to support 
the routine use of prophylactic antimicrobials in reducing the risk of postoperative 
complications after extraction of wisdom teeth, or teeth requiring surgical  
extraction.1-3 
A Cochrane review concluded that 12 people would need to be given antimicrobial 
prophylaxis, compared to no antimicrobial prophylaxis, to prevent one surgical 
site infection for extraction of wisdom teeth. Thus, 38 people would need to take 
antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent one case of dry socket, and one in 21 people  
would experience an adverse effect.1
--- Page 82 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
72
Due to increasing antimicrobial resistance, clinicians should carefully consider  
whether treating twelve healthy patients with antimicrobials to prevent one infection  
is likely to do more harm than good.1
12.1.2 Removal of retained roots
No randomised controlled trials have investigated the effect of an antimicrobial 
against placebo in reducing the postoperative complications after removing retained 
roots. Currently, the evidence stems from studies related to wisdom teeth extraction 
which do not support the routine use of antimicrobial prophylaxis.1
12.1.3 Peri-radicular surgery
There are no reported studies demonstrating a high level of surgical site infections 
with peri-radicular surgery. In a systematic review of antimicrobial prophylaxis for 
oral procedures, one study specifically showed no differences compared to placebo in 
preventing infection after endodontic surgery.4,5 Therefore, antimicrobial prophylaxis  
is not recommended for peri-radicular surgery.
12.1.4 Surgical removal of soft tissue lesions
No randomised controlled trials have investigated the effect of systemic antimicrobials 
against placebo in reducing postoperative complications after the removal of non-
malignant soft tissue lesions. 
An RCT provided some evidence that topical prophylactic oxytetracycline can reduce 
post-biopsy pain. It was unclear whether this was a result of the anti-inflammatory 
properties of tetracycline, rather than an antimicrobial effect, as the colonisation levels  
of microorganisms before and after treatment were not measured.6 
The use of topical antimicrobials is not recommended as it could lead to antimicrobial 
resistance which would outweigh the benefit of its use.
--- Page 83 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
73
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are not recommended to prevent postoperative 
complications after peri-radicular surgery, minor surgical removal of soft 
tissue lesions, extraction of impacted wisdom teeth, surgical extractions 
of teeth or retained roots 
Strong recommendation, high quality evidence
12.1.5 Oral antral communications
Oral antral communications (OAC) may be the result of cysts, trauma, tumours, 
bisphosphonates or oral surgery. The extraction of maxillary posterior teeth is the  
most common cause of OAC.
It has been suggested by some authors that an OAC of less than 2mm in diameter 
tends to close spontaneously. Other authors suggest that sole suturing of the gingiva  
of less than 5mm allows healing, whereas those larger than 5mm require surgical 
closure. There is no evidence or consensus. Unless OACs are properly treated, it has 
been reported that approximately 50% of patients will experience sinusitis 48 hours 
later, and 90% of patients will develop sinusitis after two weeks of no treatment.7 
Large acute OACs and cases where root or root fragments have been introduced into 
the sinus require immediate referral and specialist management within 48 hours.
No RCTs are available, but experts agree that because of the high risk of sinus infection 
immediately following an OAC, antimicrobials should be prescribed.
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are recommended to prevent acute sinusitis as a result of 
an OAC
Strong recommendation, very low evidence
--- Page 84 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
74
12.1.5.1 Antimicrobial drug choices8
12.1.5.1.1 First choice
PHENOXYMETHYLPENICILLIN
Adults
500mg orally four times a day for up to 5 days
Children
12-17yrs: 500mg orally four times a day for up to 5 days
12.1.5.1.2 Second choice (penicillin allergy)
DOXYCYCLINE 
Adults
Initially 200mg orally 1 dose for one day, then maintenance 100mg once 
a day for 4 days
Children 
12-17 years: Initially 200mg orally 1 dose for one day, then maintenance 
100mg once a day for a further 4 days
Or 
CLARITHROMYCIN
Adults
500mg orally twice a day for up to 5 days
Children 
12-17yrs: 500mg orally twice a day for up to 5 days
--- Page 85 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
75
12.1.6 Dental implants
Dental implant procedures are graded as clean-contaminated surgery. Several 
systematic reviews reported that whilst the risk of implant failure (implant loss) was 
reduced when prophylactic antimicrobials were used, the incidence of postoperative 
infection (SSIs) did not significantly reduce.9-11 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for implant placement remains controversial. The number  
of patients needed to treat (NNT) with antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent one  
patient having an implant failure in these studies ranged from 25-48. Clinicians  
should carefully consider any benefit in the context of increasing antimicrobial 
resistance and stewardship.
There are no RCTs comparing the effect of antimicrobial prophylaxis against no 
prophylaxis when oral bone augmentation procedures are used in conjunction  
with dental implant placement. 
12.1.6.1 Dental implants without bone augmentation
A number of systematic reviews show that healthy patients undergoing implant surgery 
for straightforward cases did not benefit from antimicrobial prophylaxis.12-14 One, a 
narrative summary of systematic reviews, suggests that the NNT is 50 patients with 
antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent one implant failure.12 A further systematic review 
and meta-analysis showed that there was a low level of postoperative infections and 
no significant differences in early, late or total postoperative infections. This study 
confirmed the findings of previous studies as it showed that antimicrobial prophylaxis is 
not indicated for prevention of SSIs following implant placement in healthy patients.15 
However, for complex or compromised patients, a study and expert consensus suggests 
the results were inconclusive.12,16 
12.1.6.2 Dental implants with bone augmentation
Cohort studies have suggested that surgical site infections range from about 4-10% in 
bone augmented implant procedures, even when antimicrobial prophylaxis is used, with 
contributory factors such as age, oral hygiene and smoking.17 There also appears to be 
no difference in SSIs between autologous grafts and allogenic, alloplastic or xenografts.
--- Page 86 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
76
A small placebo-controlled double blind trial concluded that there was a statistically 
significant increased risk of having an infectious complication after an intraoral bone 
graft without antimicrobial prophylaxis.18 In an RCT comparing preoperative penicillin 
with clindamycin, there was no difference in infection rates. The infection rates were 
also found to be low.19
Case studies have shown that surgical site infection rates are similar after bone 
augmented implant placement with preoperative or pre- and postoperative 
prophylactic antimicrobials. It is, therefore, accepted practice to use a single dose 
preoperatively.20-23 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Antimicrobials prophylaxis is not routinely recommended for placing 
dental implants
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for intraoral bone augmentation 
when placing dental implants 
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
12.1.6.3 Prophylactic antimicrobial drug regimens
The BNF does not provide advice on prescribing prophylactic antimicrobials for dental 
treatment. The choice of antimicrobial for prophylaxis should cover the organisms 
most likely to cause postoperative infections and take the patients’ medical and drug 
history into account.
A systematic review and network meta-analysis on antimicrobial prophylaxis protocols 
in implant placement concluded that there is insufficient evidence to confidently 
recommend a specific dosage of amoxicillin, but that the following is effective:24 
--- Page 87 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
77
12.1.6.3.1 First choice
AMOXICILLIN
Adults: 3g orally one hour before surgery 
12.1.6.3.2 Second choice
In the absence of any published scientific literature for patients allergic to penicillin, 
clindamycin has been suggested.13 Clinicians are reminded of the risk of significant 
morbidity/mortality associated with Clostridium difficile when prescribing clindamycin. 
As this in an important risk to consider, it should be included in consent when 
prescribing clindamycin.
CLINDAMYCIN
Adults: 600mg orally (4x150mg) one hour before surgery 
12.1.7 Regenerative and non-regenerative periodontal surgeries
Surgical site infection rates in regenerative periodontal surgeries is extremely low.25 
In a literature review of RCTs, no statistically significant difference was found in SSI 
rate	(<1%)	when	using	antimicrobial	prophylaxis	compared	to	no	prophylaxis	for	
periodontal surgery.26,27 
When enamel matrix derivatives (EMD) were used for the surgical treatment of 
intrabony periodontal defects, the use of prophylactic antimicrobials did not produce 
statistically superior pocket depth (PD) reduction and clinical attachment level (CAL) 
gain when compared to treatment with EMD alone in RCTs.28-30 
There is no evidence of benefit to support the use of antimicrobial prophylaxis with 
membranes when used as part of guided tissue regeneration (GTR).31 Similar outcomes 
are achieved whether antimicrobial prophylaxis is used or not. 
--- Page 88 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
78
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobials are not recommended to prevent postoperative 
complications for non-regenerative or regenerative periodontal surgeries 
using EMD or GTR
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
12.2 MAXILLOFACIAL SURGERY
12.2.1 Open reduction fractures
Open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) is the treatment of choice for mandible fractures. 
In a systematic review, 4 RCTs showed no postoperative infections related to maxillary, 
condylar or zygomatic fractures. There was a decrease in the infection rate of mandibular 
fractures in the antimicrobial treated groups compared with the control groups.32 
A further systematic review including RCTs and case series suggested that the overall 
evidence for the use of prophylactic antimicrobials is poor due to observational studies 
of poor quality and RCTs of overall low quality.33 
Evidence from a prospective RCT confirms that there is no benefit from postoperative 
as well as preoperative antimicrobials.34 It is generally accepted that a single full 
therapeutic dose is given no more than 60 minutes prior to surgical incision to  
prevent SSIs.35
An antimicrobial for prophylaxis should cover the organisms most likely to cause 
infection. It should also take the local resistance patterns and the patient’s medical 
and drug history into account, and be based on local prescribing policies/formularies.
RECOMMENDATION 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is normally only recommended for open 
reduction of mandibular fractures
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
--- Page 89 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
79
12.2.2 Orthognathic surgery
Orthognathic surgery is classed as major clean contaminated maxillofacial surgery. 
Postoperative infection rates vary between 2% and 33%,36 therefore, antimicrobial 
prophylaxis is indicated.
The quality of evidence from RCTs and case series available is very weak and there is  
still no consensus on the efficacy of antimicrobial prophylaxis, the appropriate drug, 
and the dose and duration of administration for orthognathic surgery. There is some 
evidence to support the use of one dose of preoperative antimicrobial prophylaxis  
to reduce the postoperative infection rate in orthognathic surgery.36-38
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for orthognathic surgery
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
12.2.3 Intraoral bone grafting
There is a paucity of evidence on whether antimicrobial prophylaxis is indicated  
when block bone grafts are inserted intraorally. One randomised controlled double-
blind study showed that there was a statistically significant increased risk of having  
an infection after an intraoral bone grafting procedure when antimicrobial prophylaxis 
was not used.18
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for intraoral bone grafts
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
12.2.4 Soft tissue surgery and grafting
Surgical procedures in the maxillofacial region in which the incision and exposure does 
not extend into the oral cavity, including submandibular and parotid gland surgery 
and TMJ surgery, are classed as clean surgical procedures. 
--- Page 90 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
80
A prospective RCT showed that there was no benefit of prophylactic antimicrobials 
in revision clean head and neck surgery.39 NICE, in its guideline on the prevention 
and management of surgical site infections, does not support the routine use of 
antimicrobial prophylaxis for clean surgical procedures.40 
There are no RCTs investigating placebo vs. antimicrobial prophylaxis in intraoral 
soft tissue grafting. However, there is evidence that antimicrobial prophylaxis is not 
required in regenerative periodontal surgeries (see section 12.1.7).
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not recommended for soft tissue surgery and 
grafting
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
12.2.5 Major head and neck oncology surgery
In major head and neck oncology surgeries with excision of malignant lesions, RCTs 
established the need for prophylactic antimicrobials as the wound infection rate with 
placebo ranged from 20% to 78%, compared with 10% to 25% with those who received 
prophylaxis.41,42
A systematic review provided evidence that there is no difference in the risk of 
wound infection with 1 day vs. 5 days of systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis in clean-
contaminated head and neck surgery, but that no specific antimicrobial could be 
recommended due to insufficient data.43 
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for head and neck oncology 
surgery
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
--- Page 91 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
81
12.2.6 Prophylactic antimicrobial drug regimen 
The choice of antimicrobial for prophylaxis should cover the organisms most likely  
to cause infection, take local resistance patterns and patients’ medical and drug history 
into account, and be based on local prescribing policies/formularies. There is strong 
evidence that a pre-operative single full therapeutic dose one hour before surgery  
is effective.35,43
12.3 REIMPLANTATION OF TEETH
12.3.1 Reimplanting an avulsed tooth
A number of guidelines suggest that antimicrobials should be considered when re-
implanting an avulsed tooth.44-46 Some guidelines suggest that it might be prudent to 
consider antimicrobial prophylaxis in certain circumstances, e.g. medical history.46
In a systematic review and meta-analysis, it was concluded that there was no clinical 
evidence clearly contradicting or supporting existing guidelines. Also, there was no 
significant association between prescribing systemic antimicrobials and improved  
pulp or periodontal outcomes.47
It is generally accepted that the evidence for prescribing antimicrobials for 
reimplantation of an avulsed tooth is very poor. There is also no scientific evidence  
to recommend one antimicrobial regimen over another.
Dentists should be aware of the risks of adverse effects of antimicrobial resistance 
to the individual and the population as a whole when considering prescribing 
antimicrobial prophylaxis for reimplantation of an avulsed tooth.
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not routinely recommended for the avulsed 
tooth in a healthy patient
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
--- Page 92 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
82
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 See	section	11.4
12.3.2 Auto transplantation
Auto transplantation, or autografts, involve transplantation of a tooth from its alveolus 
to another site in the same person. A donor tooth (allograft) can be transplanted from 
another person. The donor teeth commonly used are third molars or premolars. 
There are no RCTs comparing the success of using antimicrobial prophylaxis against 
no antimicrobial prophylaxis in auto transplantation. Some case studies suggest that 
antimicrobial prophylaxis improves the likelihood of having a good outcome with  
auto transplantation.48,49
A systematic review of outcomes of autotransplanted teeth suggested, following a 
comparison of observational studies with and without antimicrobial prophylaxis, that 
the failure rate was 2.5 times higher in studies not using antimicrobial therapy than 
in those using it.50 The studies in this review used a variety of antimicrobial regimens 
(antimicrobial, dose, timing, frequency) and as such, there was no scientific evidence 
to recommend one antimicrobial regimen over another.
Clinicians should carefully consider any benefit in antimicrobial prophylaxis against 
increasing AMR and responsibility for AMS before prescribing. 
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis may be indicated for auto transplantation 
Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence
--- Page 93 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
83
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Excellent	aseptic	surgical	technique 	
•	 Follow	standard	procedure	for	transplantation 51
•	 Consider	risk/benefit	of 	antimicrobial	prophylaxis	preoperatively
•	 Splint	for	1-2	months
•	 RCT	when	tooth	is	stable
•	 Orthodontic/restorative	treatment	as	necessary
•	 Radiographic	review	to	check	root	development/resorption
References
1 Lodi G, Figini L, Sardella A, et al. Antibiotics to prevent complications following tooth extractions. 
Cochrane Database Syst. Review. 2012 Nov 14;(11):CD003811. 
2 Marchionni S, Covani U, Toti P, et al. The effectiveness of systemic antibiotic prophylaxis in  
preventing local complications after tooth extraction. A systematic review. Euro J Oral Implantol. 
2017; 10(2):127-132.
3 Singh Gill A, Morrissey H, Rahman A. A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Evaluating Antibiotic 
Prophylaxis in Dental Implants and Extraction Procedures. Medicina (Kaunas). 2018;54(6):95. 
4 Lindeboom JAH, Frenken JWH, Valkenburg P, et al. The role of preoperative prophylactic antibiotic 
administration in periapical endodontic surgery: a randomized, prospective double-blind  
placebo-controlled study. Int Endodont J. 2005;38(12):877-881.
5 Moreno-Drada JA, García-Perdomo HA. Effectiveness of Antimicrobial Prophylaxis in Preventing  
the Spread of Infection as a Result of Oral Procedures: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.  
J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2016;74(7):1313-1321.
6 Lopez-Jornet P, Camacho-Alonso F, Martinez-Canovas A, et al. Topical 1% Oxytetracycline 
Hydrochloride versus Placebo in Oral Mucosa Biopsy. Dermatol Surg. 2012;(38):1054-1058.
7 Khandelwal P, Hajira N. Management of oro-antral communication and fistula: various surgical 
options. World J Plast Surg. 2017 Jan; 6(1):3-8.
8 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Sinusitis (acute): Antimicrobial prescribing.  
[NG79]. [Internet]. London: NICE; 2017. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng79.
9 Esposito M, Grusovin MG, Worthington HV. Interventions for replacing missing teeth: antibiotics 
at dental implant placement to prevent complications. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 
2013;(7):CD004152. 
10 Chrcanovic BR, Albrektsson T, Wennerberg A. Prophylactic antibiotic regimen and dental implant 
failure: a meta-analysis. J Oral Rehabil. 2014;41(12):941-956.
11 Ata-Ali J, Ata-Ali F, Ata-Ali F. Do antibiotics decrease implant failure and postoperative infections?  
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2014;43(1):68-74. 
12 Lund B, Hultin M, Tranaeus S, et al. Complex systematic review – Perioperative antibiotics in 
conjunction with dental implant placement. Clin Oral Implants Res. 2015;26(Supp.11):1-14.
13 Park J, Tennant M, Walsh LJ, et al. Is there a consensus on antibiotic usage for dental implant 
placement in healthy patients? Aus Dent J. 2018;63(1):25-33.
14 Schwartz AB, Larson EL. Antibiotic prophylaxis and postoperative complications after tooth 
extraction and implant placement: A review of the literature. J Dent. 2007;35:881-888. 
--- Page 94 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
84
15 Khouly I, Braun RS, Chambrone L. Antibiotic prophylaxis may not be indicated for prevention of 
dental implant infections in healthy patients. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Oral 
Investig. 2019;23(4):1525-1553. 
16 Klinge B, Flemming T, Cosyn J, et al. The patient undergoing implant therapy. Summary and 
consensus statements. The 4th EAO Consensus Conference 2015. Clin Oral Implant Res. 2015;26:64-67. 
17 Sakkas A, Schramm A, Winter K, et al. Risk factors for post-operative complications after 
procedures for autologous bone augmentation from different donor sites. J Cranio-Maxillofac Surg. 
2018;46(2):312-322.
18 Lindeboom JA, Van den Akker HP. A prospective placebo-controlled double-blind trial of antibiotic 
prophylaxis in intraoral bone grafting procedures: a pilot study. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol  
Oral Radiol Endod. 2003 Dec;96(6):669-72.
19 Lindeboom JA, Frenken JW, Tuk JG, et al. A randomized prospective controlled trial of antibiotic 
prophylaxis in intraoral bone-grafting procedures: preoperative single- dose penicillin versus 
preoperative single-dose clindamycin. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2006;35(5):433-436. 
20 Binahmed A, Stoykewych A, Peterson L. Single preoperative dose versus long-term prophylactic 
antibiotic regimens in dental implant surgery. Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants. 2005;(20):115-7.
21 Esposito M, Grusovin MG, Coulthard P. The efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis at placement of dental 
implants: a Cochrane systematic review of randomised controlled clinical trials. Eur J Oral Implantol. 
Summer 2008;9(Suppl. 1):95-103.
22 Karaky AE, Sawair FA, Al-Karadsheh OA, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis and early dental implant failure:   
a quasi-random controlled clinical trial. Eur J Oral Implantol. 2011;4(1):31-38.
23 Aloja ED, Ricci M, Caso G, et al. The use of bone block allografts in sinus augmentation, followed  
by delayed implant placement: A case series. Contemp Clin Dent. 2013;4(1):13-19.
24 Romandini M, De Tullio I, Congedi F, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis at dental implant placement: 
Which is the best protocol? A systematic review and network meta‐analysis. J Clin Periodontol. 
2019;(46):382-395.
25 Chechi L, Trombelli L, Nonato M. Postoperative infections and tetracycline prophylaxis in periodontal 
surgery: A retrospective study. Quintessence Int. 1992;(23):191-5.
26 Powell CA, Mealy BL, Deas DE, McDonnel HT, Moritz AJ. Post-surgical infections: Prevalence 
associated with various periodontal surgical procedures. J Periodontol. 2005;(76):329-333.
27 Liu Y, Duan D, Xin Y, et al. A review of the literature: antibiotic usage and its relevance to the 
infection in periodontal flaps, Acta Odontologica Scandinavica. 2017;75(4):288-293. 
28 Eickholz P, Röllke L, Schacher B, et al. Enamel matrix derivative in propylene glycol alginate for 
treatment of infrabony defects with or without systemic doxycycline: 12- and 24-month results.  
J Periodontol. 2014;85(5):669-75.
29 Röllke L, Schacher B, Wohlfeil M, et al. Regenerative therapy of infrabony defects with or without 
systemic doxycycline. A randomized placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Periodontol. 2012;39(5):448-56. 
30 Sculean A, Blaes A, Arweiler N, et al. The effect of postsurgical antibiotics on the healing of intrabony 
defects following treatment with enamel matrix proteins. J Periodontol. 2001;72(2):190-5.
31 Loos BG, Louwerse PH, van Winkelhoff AJ, et al. Use of barrier membranes and systemic antibiotics  
in the treatment of intraosseous defects. J Clin Periodontol. 2002;29(10):910-21. 
32 Andreasen JO, Jensen SS, Schwartz O et al. A systematic review of prophylactic antibiotics in  
the surgical treatment of maxillofacial fractures. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2006;(64):1664-1668. 
33 Kyzas PA. Use of antibiotics in the treatment of mandible fractures: a systematic review. J Oral 
Maxillofac Surg. 2011;69(4):1129-1145. 
34 Miles BA, Potter JK, Ellis E. III: The efficacy of postoperative antibiotic regimens in the open 
treatment of mandibular fractures: A prospective randomized trial. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 
2006;(64):576-582.
--- Page 95 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
85
35 Weber WP, Mujagic E, Zwahlen M, et al. Timing of surgical antimicrobial prophylaxis: a phase 3 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17(6):605-614. 
36 Oomens MA, Verlinden CR, Goey Y, et al. Prescribing antibiotic prophylaxis in orthognathic surgery:  
a systematic review. Int. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2014;(43):725-731.
37 Tan SK, Lo J, Zwahlen RA. Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis in orthognathic surgery: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of clinical trials. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 
2011;(112):19-27. 
38 Naimi-Akbar A, Hultin M, Klinge A, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis in orthognathic surgery: A complex 
systematic review. PLoS ONE. 2018;13(1):e0191161. 
39 Shkedy Y, Stern S, Nachalon Y, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis in clean head and neck surgery: A prospective 
randomised controlled trial. Clin Otolaryngol. 2018;43(6):1508-1512.
40 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Surgical site infection: prevention and 
treatment. [NG125]. [Internet]. London: NICE; 2019. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
ng125.
41 Dor P, Klastersky J. Prophylactic antibiotics in oral, pharyngeal and laryngeal surgery for cancer:  
a double-blind study. Laryngoscope. 1973;(83):1992-1998. 
42 Johnson JT, Myers EN, Thearle PB, et al. Antimicrobial prophylaxis for contaminated head and neck 
surgery. Laryngoscope. 1984;(94):46-51. 
43 Vila PM, Zenga J, Fowler S, et al. Antibiotic Prophylaxis in Clean- Contaminated Head and Neck 
Surgery: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017;157(4):580-58.
44 Flores MT, Andersson L, Andreasen JO, et al. Guidelines for the management of traumatic dental 
injuries. II. Avulsion of permanent teeth. Dent Traumatol. 2007;23:130-6.
45 Andersson L, Andreasen JO, Day P. Guidelines for the Management of Traumatic Dental Injuries:  
2. Avulsion of Permanent Teeth. Dent Traumatol 2012;28:88-96.
46 Gregg TA, Boyd DH. UK National Clinical Guidelines in Paediatric Dentistry. Treatment of avulsed 
permanent teeth in children. Int J Paed Dent. 1998;8:75-81. 
47 Hinckfuss SE, Messer LB. An evidence-based assessment of the clinical guidelines for replanted 
avulsed teeth. Part II: prescription of systemic antibiotics. Dental Traumatol. 2009;25:158-164.
48 Andreasen JO, Paulsen HU, Yu Z, et al. A long-term study of 370 autotransplanted premolars.  
Part IV. Root development subsequent to transplantation. Eur J Orthodont. 1990;(12):38-50. 
49 Tsukiboshi M. Autotransplantation of Teeth. Chicago: Quintessence Publishing; 2001. 
50 Chung W-C, Tu Y-K, Lin Y-H, et al. Outcomes of autotransplanted teeth with complete root  
formation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Periodontol. 2014;(41):412-423. 
51 Andreasen JO, Paulsen HU, Yu Z, et al. A long-term study of 370 autotransplanted pre-molars. 
Part I. Surgical procedures and standardized techniques for monitoring healing. Eur J Orthodont. 
1990;(12):3-13.
--- Page 96 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
86
--- Page 97 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
87
ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS –   
MEDICALLY COMPROMISED PATIENTS  13
Antimicrobial prophylaxis (AP) for interventive dental procedures (IDPs) for medically 
compromised patients remains controversial. In the past, antimicrobials have been 
prescribed prophylactically to prevent bacteraemias and metastatic infections 
occurring as a result of IDPs. 
The evidence for bacteraemias associated with IDPs has been reviewed, specifically in 
relation to cardiac patients. It was concluded by the British Society of Antimicrobial 
Chemotherapy (BSAC) and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence  
(NICE) that the magnitude and frequency of bacteraemias resulting from normal  
oral function (e.g. chewing, toothbrushing) is greater than from IDPs.1,2
13.1 CARDIAC DISEASE
The evidence for antimicrobial prophylaxis to prevent infective endocarditis (IE) was 
not reviewed for this guideline in light of the comprehensive review by NICE and their 
recent update.2
Whilst dental procedures can cause bacteraemia, there is no clear association with  
the development of IE. Transient bacteraemias from normal function are the likely 
cause. Prophylaxis may expose patients to the adverse effects of antimicrobials when 
the evidence of benefit has not been proven.2
Dentists should ensure that episodes of infection in people at risk of IE are investigated 
and treated promptly to reduce the risk of endocarditis developing. 
--- Page 98 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
88
RECOMMENDATION
Antibacterial prophylaxis is not routinely recommended for the prevention 
of infective endocarditis in patients undergoing dental procedures 
(see NICE guideline CG64)2 
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
Dentists should be aware of the Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme’s 
implementation advice for NICE CG64. This re-emphasises the NICE CG64 
recommendations, but notes that there are a very small number of dental patients 
that may require ‘special consideration’ for antimicrobial prophylaxis.3
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Take	a	comprehensive	medical	history
•	 Assess	whether	the	patient	is	a	‘special	consideration’	for	antimicrobial 	
 prophylaxis
•	 Seek	advice	from	patient’s	cardiologist
•	 Assess	likelihood	of 	interventive	dental	treatment
•	 Discuss	the	risks	and	benefits	of 	antimicrobial	prophylaxis	with	the	
 patient and explain why antimicrobial prophylaxis is no longer 
 routinely recommended for dental treatment
•	 Decide	on	antimicrobial	prophylaxis	appropriate	to	the	circumstances 	
 of the individual and in consultation with them, their cardiologist, their 
 families and carers or guardian
•	 Stress	the	importance	of 	maintaining	good	oral	health
•	 Discuss	symptoms	with	the	patient	that	may	indicate	infective 	
 endocarditis and when to seek expert advice
13.2 TOTAL JOINT REPLACEMENTS
It has been hypothesised that oral bacteria leads to prosthetic joint replacement 
infections, but the evidence is unproven and relies on anecdotal case reports.4
--- Page 99 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
89
A systematic review including nine studies and additional consulted literature explored 
the risk of dental interventions and subsequent artificial joint infection. The study 
concluded that there was no evidence that use of antimicrobial prophylaxis reduces 
the incidence of joint infection.5 The BSAC advises that patients with prosthetic joint 
implants (including total hip replacements) do not require antimicrobial prophylaxis 
for dental treatment.6
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not recommended for dental procedures in 
patients with joint replacements
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
13.3 MISCELLANEOUS PROSTHETIC IMPLANTS
Patients who have undergone penile, breast, cardiac pacemakers or intraocular 
implants have never been considered susceptible to infection as a result of IDPs.6,7 
There is no strong evidence to support that these implants are susceptible to dental 
procedure based infection.8
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not recommended for dental procedures in 
patients with cardiac pacemakers, penile, breast or intra-ocular implants
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
13.4 RENAL DIALYSIS
Evidence for antimicrobial prophylaxis for patients on dialysis undergoing IDPs is 
lacking. The risk of infection involves that of vascular access for sites for dialysis  
(fistula, vascular grafts, and catheters). It has been suggested that there is a theoretical 
risk that these sites (vascular graft sites of collagen or polyurethane) may be vulnerable  
to secondary infection as a result of a dental procedure.
--- Page 100 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
90
There is no clear evidence of metastatic infections resulting from dental procedures 
in patients receiving renal dialysis, despite patients with end stage renal disease 
(ESRD) also having complications, including increased cardiovascular risk, cardiogenic 
pulmonary oedema.9
The BSAC recommends that prophylaxis is not required for these patients.6
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for patients undergoing renal dialysis is not 
normally recommended for dental procedures 
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Consider	advice	on	antimicrobial	prophylaxis	from	renal	specialist	if 	
 there are co-morbidities
•	 Advise	the	patient	of 	the	need	for	good	oral	health
•	 Provide	oral	hygiene	instruction	and	dietary	advice
•	 Consider	the	need	for	more	regular	recall	examinations
13.5 INTRAVENOUS ACCESS DEVICES
These include central intravenous lines/indwelling catheters used for parenteral 
nutrition or chemotherapy, and catheters for haemodialysis. There is no scientific 
evidence of infection of these devices arising from IDPs. The BSAC recommends  
that antimicrobial prophylaxis is not required for dental treatment.6
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not required for dental procedures in patients 
with intravenous access devices 
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
--- Page 101 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
91
13.6 IMMUNOCOMPROMISED PATIENTS
Immune function may be impaired by a range of conditions, such as leukaemia, 
immunosuppressive drugs following organ transplantation, lymphomas, 
chemotherapy,	radiotherapy,	poorly	controlled	diabetes	and	HIV.	As	a	result,	 
this group of patients are susceptible to opportunistic infections.
It is recognised that prompt, aggressive management of dental infections in this  
group of patients is imperative and should be carried out in conjunction with the 
patient’s specialist. 
There is no evidence to support the increased risk of infection from dental procedures  
or increased risk of surgical site infections (SSIs) arising as a result of dental procedures 
in these patients.
13.6.1 Diabetes
Diabetes, particularly if poorly controlled, results in increased inflammation and 
infection risk. Regardless of their diabetic control, dental infections should be treated 
aggressively and with antimicrobials where indicated, e.g. evidence of systemic spread 
(see chapter 4).
A review of prophylactic antimicrobial use in diabetic dental patients concluded 
that well-controlled Type 1 and Type 2 were not a risk for postoperative surgical 
complications, and that prophylactic antimicrobials should not be prescribed other 
than in cases where they are indicated in a non-diabetic patient.10 
A literature review could find no evidence of increased risk of postoperative infections 
or efficacy of prophylactic antimicrobials in reducing postoperative infections in 
diabetic patients undergoing surgical dental procedures.11
Further, a prospective cohort study showed that in the presence of impaired neutrophil 
function and poor glycaemic control, there was no increase in post extraction 
complications.12
--- Page 102 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
92
RECOMMENDATION 
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not recommended routinely for diabetic 
patients undergoing dental procedures
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Take	a	comprehensive	history	including	control	of 	diabetes
•	 Ensure the patient will not undergo hypoglycaemia on the day of treatment
•	 Prescribe	antimicrobials	only	if 	indicated	for	other	reasons	than	diabetes
•	 Avoid	aspirin	and	corticosteroids	as	they	may	have	an	effect	on 	
 hypoglycaemic medications
•	 Refer	for	specialist	advice/management	if 	other	significant	co-morbidities	
13.6.2 HIV
There are no contraindications and few complications associated with comprehensive 
oral	healthcare	for	these	patients.	The	majority	of	HIV	infected	patients	are	medically	
stable.	For	HIV	infected	individuals,	the	medical	history	impacting	on	the	delivery	of	
dental	care	will	not	be	related	to	HIV	immunosuppression,	but	to	non-HIV	associated	
conditions. 
A review of several retrospective and cohort studies shows low infection rates following 
dental	procedures.	The	rates	were	comparable	with	non-HIV	patients	and	none	of	the	
studies showed a significant relationship between decrease of infection rate and use of 
antimicrobial prophylaxis.13-16 
There is no data to support routine antimicrobial prophylaxis for dental procedures 
in	patients	with	HIV	disease	based	solely	on	CD4+	counts	before	invasive	procedures,	
even when the CD4+ counts are less than 200 cell/mm3.17 
Less	than	1%	of	HIV	infected	patients	develop	severe	neutropenia.18 Although there 
are no specific recommendations regarding the need for antimicrobial prophylaxis, 
--- Page 103 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
93
patients	with	severe	neutropenia	(<500	cells/mm3)	should	be	discussed	with	the	
patient’s haematologist.
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not routinely recommended for HIV patients 
undergoing dental procedures
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Take	a	comprehensive	medical	history 	
•	 Consult	with	HIV	specialist	and	other	medical	providers	when	patients 	
 have advanced HIV disease or major comorbidities 
•	 No	antimicrobials	are	indicated	unless	required	for	alternative	clinical 	
 indications 
•	 Provide	comprehensive	oral  healthcare
•	 Review	the	need	for	more	frequent	recall	appointments
13.6.3 Chemotherapy
Many patients undergoing chemotherapy will have significant neutropenia which 
has led to concerns regarding the risk of developing an infection as a result of dental 
surgery in the form of SSIs, fever, or sepsis.
It is generally accepted that establishment of good oral health prior to chemotherapy 
and delay of elective and non-urgent treatment will reduce any likelihood of dentally 
induced infections. 
Infections of dental origin should be aggressively managed by removal of the cause 
and appropriate use of antimicrobials in consultation with the patient’s oncologist.  
It is most likely that hospital inpatients will be undergoing antimicrobial prophylactic 
therapy dictated by an oncologist/haematologist.
--- Page 104 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
94
There is no evidence that dental procedures produce a higher level of SSIs in patients 
undergoing chemotherapy compared to healthy patients. The BSAC working party has 
stated that there is also no evidence that dental treatment is followed by a metastatic 
infection in immunosuppressed or immunodeficient patients.6 There is no evidence 
of efficacy of antimicrobial prophylaxis for dental treatment provided to patients 
undergoing chemotherapy.9
 
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for dental procedures is not normally 
recommended for patients undergoing chemotherapy
Strong recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Take	a	comprehensive	medical	history
•	 Stress	the	importance	of 	good	oral	health
•	 Discuss	management	of 	dental	treatment	with	the	patient’s	oncologist
•	 No routine antimicrobials unless indicated for alternative medical reasons
•	 Treat	if 	possible	outside	the	chemotherapy	cycle
13.6.4 Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy carries a risk of osteoradionecrosis (ORN). ORN is an area of exposed 
devitalised irradiated bone that fails to heal for three months or longer. it can occur 
spontaneously due to periodontal or apical disease, trauma from dentures, or after 
surgery or tooth extraction. 
A systematic review of ORN suggests that there is an incidence of 7% for extractions 
reducing to 6% with prophylactic antimicrobials.19 The risk of developing ORN persists 
for years after radiotherapy, but evidence of the risk of developing ORN after extraction 
of teeth outside the field of radiation is almost non-existent.20
There are no RCTs or prospective cohort studies to assess the efficacy of prophylactic 
--- Page 105 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
95
antimicrobials in preventing ORN in patients who have undergone radiotherapy  
to the head and neck. Routine use of prophylactic antimicrobials for dental extractions  
to prevent ORN is not supported. 
Patients who have undergone radiotherapy to the area of the extraction should be 
referred for specialist management. Access to the radiation records of dosage and 
radiation field will enable a reliable assessment of the risk of developing ORN post 
extraction.21
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis may be recommended for dental extractions 
following an assessment of the risk of developing ORN
Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Ensure	good	oral	health	prior	to	starting	any	radiotherapy	treatment
•	 Extractions should be done and healing complete prior to radiotherapy
•	 Referral	post	radiotherapy	to	a	specialist	for	risk	assessment	and 	
 management of extractions
•	 Antimicrobial	prophylaxis	should	be	given	where	clearly	indicated
•	 Long	term	follow-up	after	extractions
•	 Management	of 	ORN	if	present	(see chapter 12)
13.6.5 Solid organ transplants
An increasing number of people are receiving organ transplants and thus living longer,  
with dental professionals playing an important role in their management.
The transplant patient is at greater risk of infection immediately following transplant 
because of maximal immunosuppression. As a result of lifetime antirejection 
medication, they remain immunosuppressed.22 
--- Page 106 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
96
There is no evidence that dental treatment is followed by metastatic infections  
or increased SSIs in immunosuppressed or immunodeficient patients, or that 
prophylactic antimicrobials are required.6
A systematic review showed that the evidence supporting the use of prophylactic 
antimicrobials for dental procedures in solid organ transplant patients is lacking.9 
There is also a lack of consensus, lack of evidence of efficacy, potential adverse 
interactions and reported concern that antimicrobial prophylaxis predisposes to the 
risk of infection by opportunistic organisms in these patients.22 Oral health providers 
should discuss the transplant patient’s overall health status with their physician and 
transplant team prior to undertaking dental procedures.
Any dental infections in these patients should be treated aggressively and 
antimicrobials should be prescribed where there is an indication (e.g. spreading 
infection) and in consultation with their physician.
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not routinely required for patients with solid 
organ transplants prior to interventive dental procedures
Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Dental	health	assessment	and	treatment	prior	to	transplant	surgery
•	 No	dental	treatment	(stabilisation	only	for	emergencies)	for	the	first	6 	
 months after transplant surgery
•	 Discuss	overall	health,	dental	treatment	and	the	need	for	antimicrobial 	
 prophylaxis on a case by case basis with the medical/surgical team
•	 Stress	the	importance	of 	good	oral	health	and	regular	recalls
13.6.6 Tumours of haemopoietic and lymphoid tissue
Patients with suppressed and/or impaired immune system acquired as a result of these 
--- Page 107 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
97
tumours or management with immunosuppressive drugs may be at risk of septicaemia 
as	a	result	of	dental	infections.	Various	levels	of	neutropenia	have	been	proposed	at	
certain thresholds for antimicrobial prophylaxis in these patients when undergoing 
invasive dental interventions.23 
A systematic review concluded that there is no evidence that these patients succumb 
to systemic infections or increased SSIs as a result of dental procedures. It is generally 
accepted that antimicrobial prophylaxis for dental procedures in the afebrile and 
asymptomatic immunosuppressed patient to prevent infections is not required.9
Dental infections should be treated aggressively with antimicrobials where indicated, 
e.g. spreading infections. Careful evaluation of haematological parameters and 
consultation with the patient’s medical management team during their treatment 
should be instituted prior to any invasive dental treatments. 
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis for dental procedures is not routinely 
recommended for patients with haemopoietic or lymphoid tumours
Conditional recommendation, very low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Patients	are	best	managed	by	specialists
•	 Dental	assessment	and	treatment	should	be	prior	to	chemotherapy	and 	
 stem cell treatment
•	 Consultation	and	risk	assessment	of 	dental	procedures	during	treatment	
 and need for antimicrobial prophylaxis with haematologist/transplant team
•	 Prescribe	antimicrobials	where	indicated
•	 Importance	of 	maintaining	good	oral	health	during	and	post	treatment
13.6.7 Prevention of medication related osteonecrosis of the jaw
Patients who are prescribed anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs may have a risk  
--- Page 108 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
98
of medication related osteonecrosis of the jaw (MRONJ) resulting from dental 
procedures involving the bone, especially extractions. Estimates of risk vary depending 
on drug treatment regimen, medical diagnosis (e.g. type of cancer or osteoporosis) 
from 0.1% to 2%.24,25 
In a review of the literature and existing guidelines, it is strongly recommended that 
prior to anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic medication, patients undergo an assessment, 
remedial treatment and preventive care.26
There are no RCTs investigating the efficacy of antimicrobial prophylaxis in preventing 
MRONJ in dental patients undergoing procedures involving bone. Dentists should 
balance the very low risk of MRONJ against the side effects and toxicity associated  
with antimicrobials and the effects of antimicrobial resistance for the individual and  
the wider population.
RECOMMENDATION
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is not recommended for dental procedures to 
prevent MRONJ
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE26
•	 Assess,	treat	and	provide	preventive	advice	prior	to	medical	treatment
•	 Discuss	risk	of 	MRONJ	with	patients	taking	antiresorptive	or	
 antiangiogenic medication 
•	 Refer	medically	complex	patients	for	specialist	advice	or	treatment
•	 Provide	appropriate	treatment	including	procedures	involving	bone
•	 Do	not	prescribe	prophylactic	antimicrobials
•	 Advise	patient	of 	clinical	signs/symptoms	of	MRONJ	and	importance	
 of seeking advice
•	 Review	the	patient	for	healing	at	approximately	8	weeks
•	 Refer	for	specialist	management	if 	MRONJ	is	present	(see section 5.3) 
--- Page 109 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
99
13.7 PROPHYLACTIC ANTIMICROBIAL REGIMENS
The BNF does not provide advice on prophylactic antimicrobial regimens for dental 
treatment to prevent metastatic infections or surgical site infections in patients who 
are medically compromised.6 The choice of antimicrobial for prophylaxis should cover 
the organisms most likely to cause infection, take account of local resistance patterns 
and patients’ medical and drug history.
If antimicrobial prophylaxis is deemed necessary for dental procedures due to the 
patients’ medical history, the antimicrobial choice and regimen should be based on a 
consultation with the treating medical team and local prescribing policies/formularies.
References
1 Gould FK, Elliott TS, Foweraker J, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of endocarditis: report of  
the Working Party of the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. J Antimicrob Chemother. 
2006 Jun;57(6):1035-42.
2 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Prophylaxis against infective endocarditis in 
adults and children undergoing interventional procedures. [CG64]. [Internet]. London: NICE; 2016. 
Available at: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg64. 
3 NHS Education for Scotland, Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme. Antibiotic prophylaxis  
against infective endocarditis. Implementation advice. [Internet]. Glasgow: NHS Education for 
Scotland; 2018. Available at: http://www.sdcep.org.uk/published-guidance/antibiotic-prophylaxis/.
4 Sendi P, Uçkay I, Suvà D, et al. Antibiotic Prophylaxis During Dental Procedures in Patients with 
Prosthetic Joints. J. Bone Joint Infect .2016;(1):42-9.
5 Rademacher WMH, Walenkamp GHIM, Moojen DJF, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not indicated 
prior to dental procedures for the prevention of periprosthetic joint infections. Acta Orthopaedica. 
2017;88(5):568-57.
6 Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary. 77th ed. [Internet]. London: BMJ Group and 
Pharmaceutical Press; 2019. Available at http://www.medicinescomplete.com. The reader is reminded 
that the BNF is constantly revised; for the latest guidelines please consult the current edition at www.
medicinescomplete.com.
7 Little JW, Rhodus NL. The need for antibiotic prophylaxis with penile implants during invasive dental 
procedures: a national survey of urologists. J Uro. 1992;148(6):1801-4.
8 Stoopler ET, Sia YW, Kuperstein AS. Do patients with solid organ transplants or breast implants 
require antibiotic prophylaxis before dental treatment? J Can Dent Assoc. 2012;(78):c5.
9 Lockhart PB, Loven B, Brennan MT, et al. The evidence base for the efficacy of antibiotic prophylaxis 
in dental practice. J Am Dent Assoc. 2007;138(4):458-74.
10 Alexander RE. Routine prophylactic antibiotic use in diabetic dental patients. J Calif Dent Assoc.  
1999 Aug;27(8):611-8.
11 Barasch A, Safford MM, Litaker MS, et al. Risk factors for oral postoperative infection in patients  
with diabetes. Spec Care Dentist. 2008;28(4):159-66.
12 Fernandes KS, Glick M, de Souza MS, et al. Association between immunologic parameters, glycaemic 
control, and postextraction complications in patients with type 2 diabetes. J Am Dent Assoc. 2015 
Aug;146(8):592-59.
--- Page 110 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
100
13 Porter SR, Scully C, Luker J. Complications of dental surgery in persons with HIV disease. Oral Surg 
Oral Med Oral Pathol. 1993;75(2):165-7.
14 Glick M, Abel S, Muzyka B, Delorenzo M. Dental complications after treating patients with AIDS.  
JADA. 1994;(125):296-301. 
15 Campo J, Cano J, Del Romero J, et al. Oral complication risks after invasive and non-invasive dental 
procedures in HIV-positive patients. Oral Dis. 2007;13(1):110-116.
16 Ata-Ali J, Ata-Ali F, Di-Benedetto N, et al. Does HIV infection have an impact upon dental implant 
osseointegration? A systematic review. MedOralPatol Oral Cir Bucal. 2015;20(3):347-56. 
17 Robbins MR. Recent Recommendations for Management of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Positive 
Patients. Dent Clin N Am. 2017;(61):365-387. 
18 Patton LL. Hematologic abnormalities among HIV-infected patients: associations of significance  
for dentistry. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 1999;(88):561-7. 
19 Nabil S, Samman N. Incidence and prevention of osteoradionecrosis after dental extraction in 
irradiated patients: a systematic review. Int. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg. 2011;(40):229-243. 
20 Thorn JJ, Hansen HS, Specht L, Bastholt L. Osteoradionecrosis of the jaws: clinical characteristics  
and relation to the field of irradiation. J Oral Maxillo- fac Surg. 2000;(58):1088-1093. 
21 Koga DH, Salvajoli JV, Alves FA. Dental extractions and radiotherapy in head and neck oncology: 
review of the literature. Oral Dis. 2008;14(1):40-4.
22 Guggenheimer J, Eghtesad B, Stock DJ. Dental management of the (solid) organ transplant patient. 
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2003;(95):383-9.
23 Williford SK, Salisbury PL, Peacock JE, et al. The safety of dental extractions in patients with 
hematologic malignancies. J Clin Oncol. 1989:7(6):798-802. 
24 Khan AA, Morrison A, Hanley DA, et al. Diagnosis and management of osteonecrosis of the jaw:  
a systematic review and international consensus. J Bone Miner Res. 2015;30(1):3-23.
25 Qi WX, Tang LN, He AN, et al. Risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw in cancer patients receiving denosumab:  
a meta-analysis of seven randomized controlled trials. Int J Clinical Oncol. 2014;19(2):403-410.
26 NHS Education for Scotland, Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme. Oral Health 
Management of Patients at Risk of Medication-related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw: Dental Clinical 
Guidance. [Internet]. Glasgow: NHS Education for Scotland; 2017. Available at http://www.sdcep.  
org.uk/published-guidance/medication-related-osteonecrosis-of-the-jaw/.
--- Page 111 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
101
VIRAL	 INFECTIONS14
Viral	infections	can	manifest	themselves	in	the	oral	cavity,	are	initially	diagnosed	on	
their clinical presentation and tend to be short lived. These include herpes simplex 
virus, varicella zoster virus, human immunodeficiency virus, coxsackie virus and 
paramyxovirus. Infections with herpes simplex are the most common and can usually  
be managed with supportive therapy.
Caution is necessary in patients who are severely immunocompromised or are unable 
to take fluids and at risk of dehydration. These patients should be referred to hospital 
for specialist care. In addition, patients with prolonged infections that fail to resolve 
should be referred for further investigation.
Management of oral viral infections is symptomatic and usually involves:
•	 Rest
•	 Plenty	of 	fluids
•	 Soft	diet
•	 Antipyretic	analgesics
•	 Antimicrobial	mouthwash	to	reduce	secondary	infection.	Chlorhexidine	or 	
hydrogen peroxide are suitable agents. The use of benzydamine mouthwash  
may provide some pain relief
A small number of patients may require antivirals. Nucleoside analogues, e.g. aciclovir 
are available for topical application. Aciclovir, valaciclovir or famciclovir can be given 
orally in suspension or tablet formulations where indicated.
14.1 PRIMARY HERPETIC GINGIVOSTOMATITIS
This	is	caused	by	the	herpes	simplex	virus	(HSV)	and	most	commonly	presents	in	 
young children.1 The incubation period is approximately five days and infection can  
--- Page 112 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
102
be subclinical. Management is primarily with supportive measures as outlined above. 
In severe cases, a full case assessment is required (see chapter 3) to assess for 
raised temperature, swollen lymph nodes, malaise, dehydration or if patients are 
immunocompromised. These patients may require systemic intravenous antiviral 
therapy and should be referred for urgent hospital treatment.
In uncomplicated cases, a systematic review suggests that there is some weak  
evidence of aciclovir being an effective treatment in reducing the number of oral 
lesions, preventing the development of new extraoral lesions, decreasing the number  
of individuals with difficulties experienced in eating and drinking, and reducing 
hospital admission for children under 6 years.2
RECOMMENDATION 
Antivirals are only recommended for the management of severe cases of 
primary herpetic stomatitis
Strong recommendation, low quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Assess	severity,	raised	temperature,	lymphadenopathy 	
•	 Assess	immunocompetency
•	 Rapid	detection	using	PCR	for	immunocompromised	patients
•	 Local	measures:	soft	diet,	hydration
•	 Advise	analgesics	if 	necessary	(see NICE clinical knowledge summary, 
 Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain3) 
•	 Management	with	antivirals	if 	indicated
•	 Review	patient
•	 Refer	if 	failure	to	respond	to	a	specialist	to	exclude	underlying	systemic	
 condition 
--- Page 113 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
103
14.1.1 Antiviral drug choice
ACICLOVIR
Adults 
Aciclovir 200mg five times a day for five days (longer if new lesions appear 
during treatment or if healing incomplete)3,4
Children
•	 1-23 months: 100mg five times a day for five days (longer if new lesions 
 appear during treatment or if healing incomplete)
•	 2-17 years: 200mg five times a day for five days (longer if new lesions 
 appear during treatment or if healing incomplete)
14.2 SECONDARY (RECURRENT) HERPES SIMPLEX INFECTIONS (HSV-1)
Synonyms: herpes labialis, cold sores
Following a primary herpetic gingivostomatitis infection, herpes simplex remains 
latent in the trigeminal ganglion. Approximately one third of people develop herpes 
labialis and a secondary infection from reactivation of the virus.
Patients who are immunocompromised with frequent, persistent or troublesome 
recurrent	HSV,	have	atypical	lesions	or	an	uncertain	diagnosis,	should	be	referred	 
to a specialist for management.
A Cochrane systematic review concluded that long-term use of oral antiviral agents 
can prevent herpes simplex labialis, but the clinical benefit is small. The evidence 
on topical antiviral agents and other interventions either showed no efficacy or 
confirmation	of	efficacy	in	preventing	HSV.5 
A systematic review of 12 RCTs conducted with healthy patients to compare  
topical aciclovir or penciclovir with placebo, found that these agents may reduce  
pain and healing time. However, the results of the studies were inconsistent and  
of marginal clinical importance.6 
--- Page 114 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
104
RECOMMENDATION
Topical antiviral preparations are not routinely recommended for herpes 
simplex infections
Strong recommendation, moderate evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Assess	medical	history,	particularly	immunocompetency
•	 Assess	for	any	red	flags	for	serious	underlying	disease
•	 Refer	if 	concern	or	uncertainty	of	diagnosis
•	 Arrange further investigation if unexplained recurrent, severe or persistent
•	 Reassure	the	patient	that	these	are	self-limiting	and	usually	heal	without 	
 scarring
•	 Provide advice on minimising risk of transmission and avoiding trigger factors
•	 Over	the	counter	topical	preparations	may	be	helpful,	e.g.	lip	barriers	or 	
 moisturising balm
•	 Consider prescribing oral antivirals for severe, frequent or persistent lesions
14.2.1 Antiviral drug choice
ACICLOVIR
Adults and children all ages
Apply aciclovir cream 5% to lesions every four hours (five times daily) at first 
signs of infection
For oral dose for immunocompromised patients, see section 14.1.1
14.3 OROFACIAL VARICELLA ZOSTER INFECTIONS
Synonyms: shingles
Systemic antivirals are advised in patients with herpes zoster infections as they have 
been found to reduce the incidence of postherpetic neuralgia and viral shedding.7 
--- Page 115 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
105
The reduction in viral load is beneficial as it can reduce the risk of corneal infection. 
Treatment with antivirals should be commenced as soon as possible and within 72 
hours of the onset of the rash. 
Patients with ophthalmic involvement, who are severely immunocompromised 
and systemically unwell, or have a severe or widespread rash, multiple dermatomal 
involvement or symptoms of erythema multiforme, should be referred for specialist 
treatment.8 The same applies to immunocompromised children and pregnant or 
breastfeeding women.8
Evidence from a meta-analysis of four randomised trials suggests that aciclovir is more 
effective than placebo at reducing the duration of pain associated with herpes zoster 
infection.8
A double-blind, randomised trial evaluated the efficacy of oral aciclovir with and 
without prednisolone for 7 days, or 21 days in acute herpes zoster and postherpetic 
neuralgia. Aciclovir alone reduced the extent and duration of the pain, the spread 
of the rash and healing. Prolonged therapy conferred a very slight benefit over the 
standard 7 day treatment with aciclovir.9
RECOMMENDATION
Antivirals are recommended for orofacial varicella zoster infections
Strong recommendation, high quality evidence
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Check	that	these	dental	patients	are	under	medical	care
•	 Assessment	of 	clinical	signs,	symptoms	and	need	for	dental	treatment
•	 Avoid	elective/routine	dental	treatment	if 	vesicles	are	open	in	the	
 orofacial area
continued on next page
--- Page 116 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
106
•	 Provide	emergency	dental	care	following	standard	infection	prevention 	
 and control procedures
•	 Antivirals	should	be	started	as	soon	as	possible,	preferably	within	72 	
 hours of the onset of the rash
•	 Advise	patient	of 	infectious	nature	until	vesicles	crusted	over	and	
 importance of self-care
•	 Refer	for	urgent	specialist	management	if 	Hutchinson’s	sign	(vesicles	
 tip or side of the nose), visual symptoms are noted or the patient is 
 immunocompromised child or adult, or pregnant or breast feeding woman
•	 Refer	for	specialist	management	if 	vesicles	fail	to	heal,	new	vesicles	are	
 forming despite 7 days of antivirals or the patient has had two episodes
14.3.1 Antiviral drug choice10
ACICLOVIR
Adults 
Aciclovir: 800mg five times a day for 7 days at 4-hourly intervals omitting 
night time dose
Or
VALACICLOVIR AND FAMCICLOVIR
These are not available within the Dental Practitioner’s Formulary. Dental 
specialists should assess the need to prescribe these as an alternative to 
aciclovir and consult their local prescribing formulary
References
1 Goldman, R. Acyclovir for herpetic gingivostomatitis in children. Canad Fam Phys. 2016;62(5):403-404. 
2 Nasser M, Fedorowicz Z, Khoshnevisan MH, et al. Acyclovir for treating primary herpetic 
gingivostomatitis. Cochrane Database Systemic Reviews. 2008(4):CD006700.
3 The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Analgesia – mild-to-moderate pain. 
[Internet]. London: NICE; 2015. Available at https://cks.nice.org.uk/analgesia-mild-to-moderate-pain. 
4 Amir J, Harel L, Smetana Z, et al. Treatment of herpes simplex gingivostomatitis with aciclovir in 
children: a randomised double blind placebo-controlled study. B Med J. 1997;314(7097):1800-3.
--- Page 117 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
107
5 Chi CC, Wang SH, Delamere FM, et al. Interventions for prevention of herpes simplex labialis  
(cold sores on the lips). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. 2015(8):CD010095. 
6 Worrall G. Herpes labialis. Clinical Evidence. BMJ Clin Evid. 2009;(2009):1704.
7 Moomaw MD, Cornea P, Rathbun RC, et al. Review of antiviral therapy for herpes labialis,  
genital herpes and herpes zoster. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2003;1(2):283-95.
8 British Medical Journal Best Practice: Acute varicella-zoster. [Internet]. London: BMJ Publishing   
Group Ltd; 2019. Available at https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/. 
9 Wood MJ, Johnson RW, McKendrick MW, et al. A randomized trial of acyclovir for 7 days or 
21 days with and without prednisolone for treatment of acute herpes zoster. New Eng J 
Med.1994;330(13):896-900.
10 Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary. 77th ed. [Internet]. London: BMJ Group  
and Pharmaceutical Press; 2019. Available at http://www.medicinescomplete.com. The reader is 
reminded that the BNF is constantly revised; for the latest guidelines please consult the current edition  
at www.medicinescomplete.com.
--- Page 118 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
108
--- Page 119 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
109
FUNGAL INFECTIONS15
There are a number of oral fungal infections, some of which are rare, e.g. aspergillosis, 
histoplasmosis and cryptococcosis. Most oral fungal infections are caused by imperfect 
yeasts belonging to the genus Candida. 
15.1 ORAL CANDIDOSIS
Oral candidosis (candidiasis) is most notably associated with Candida albicans. Other 
Candida species are found as commensals in the oral mucosa and may be putative 
pathogens (e.g. C glabrata, C tropicalis, C krusei, C auris).
Candida species carriage in the oral cavity, particularly on the dorsum of the tongue, 
is observed in up to 65% of patients’ mouths, with higher colonisation levels in young 
children and denture wearers. Recurrent infections are problematic in patients where 
the risk factors or underlying disease cannot be readily eliminated or controlled. 
Clinicians should always be mindful that a number of underlying factors predispose  
to oral candidosis:1 
•	 Physiological:	elderly,	infants,	pregnancy
•	 Local	factors:	dry	mouth,	radiotherapy,	poor	oral	hygiene, 	 
oral appliance wear, smoking
•	 Medical:	antimicrobial	therapy,	systemic	and	inhalation 	 
steroid therapy, immunosuppressive medication
•	 Nutritional:	iron,	folate,	vit	B12	deficiencies,	anaemia
•	 Systemic:	endocrine	disorders	including	diabetes
•	 Immune	disorders:	HIV	infection,	AIDS
•	 Malignancy:	acute	leukaemia,	agranulocytosis
•	 Dry	mouth:	result	of 	radiation,	drug	therapy,	Sjogren’s	syndrome
--- Page 120 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
110
Several classifications of oral fungal infections have been used, but the most frequently 
adopted divides the infection into primary oral candidosis (localised to oral and 
perioral tissues) and secondary oral candidosis (generalised candida infections of 
mucosal membranes and cutaneous surfaces of the body).2
Candida infections are superficial or invasive. Superficial infections often affect the 
mucous membranes and can be treated successfully with topical antifungal drugs. 
When invasive, they enter the bloodstream causing systemic infections requiring oral  
or intravenous systemic antifungals.
Clinically, oral candidosis presents as four main variants: pseudomembranous, 
erythematous, hyperplastic and candida associated lesions. 
15.1.1 Pseudomembranous candidosis
Synonyms: thrush, pseudomembranous candidosis
This condition is characterised by creamy white plaques, which diagnostically can  
be dislodged to leave raw bleeding mucosa. These lesions can appear on any part  
of the oral mucosa and pharynx. The various factors causing this condition are  
detailed in section 15.1.1
Antifungal therapy is the mainstay of treatment, both therapeutically to treat infections 
and prophylactically to prevent infections, in medically compromised patients along 
with local measures, such as:
•	 Good	oral	hygiene
•	 Denture/appliance	hygiene
•	 Rinsing	with	water	following	using	a	corticosteroid	inhaler,	use	of 	spacer	device
•	 Antimicrobial	rinses 	
In a systematic review, prophylactic antifungals, such as fluconazole, are shown to be 
more effective than oral nystatin at reducing the proportion of people who develop oral 
candidosis. This applies to people having chemotherapy or radiotherapy for cancer. It is 
also shown that it is more effective at preventing candidosis in immunocompromised 
infants, children and people with AIDS, AIDS-related complex, or CD4+ cell counts of 
300 cells/microlitre or less.3 
--- Page 121 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
111
Prophylactic use in immunocompromised patients to prevent oral candidosis should 
be managed by the patient’s medical team (haematologist) as part of their treatment.
In a surveillance study of antifungal susceptibility of oral candidal isolates in the UK, 
oral Candida species were shown to have a high level of susceptibilities to a range of 
antifungal agents.4 Nevertheless, there is increasing evidence of the development of 
antifungal resistance.
The recommended therapeutic management of fungal infections is with nystatin 
suspension, miconazole or fluconazole.5 Both miconazole and fluconazole seem more 
effective than nystatin at rates of clinical cure of oral candidosis in immunocompetent 
and immunocompromised infants and children.6-8
Fluconazole is effective for unresponsive infections if a topical antifungal drug cannot 
be used or if the patient has dry mouth.5
RECOMMENDATION
Antifungals are recommended as an adjunct to local measures (where 
applicable) to manage oral candidosis
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
15.1.1.1 Antifungal drug choices
NYSTATIN
Adults
•	 100,000	units	oral	suspension	four	times	a	day	after	food	for	seven	days, 	
 or continued for two days after lesions have healed
•	 Advise	patient	to	rinse	the	liquid	around	their	mouth	and	then	hold	it 	
 against the lesions for five minutes, if possible, before spitting out. Avoid 
 rinsing, eating or drinking immediately after use
continued on next page
--- Page 122 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
112
Children
1 month-18 years: Use adult dose as above
Or
MICONAZOLE
Adults
Apply 2.5ml of oral gel to the affected area four times a day after food and 
retain near the lesion before swallowing. Use for at least seven days, after 
lesions have healed or symptoms have cleared
Children
•	 1-23 months: 1.25 mL of oral gel four times a day, treatment should be 
 continued for at least 7 days after lesions have healed or symptoms have 
 cleared, to be smeared around the inside of the mouth after feeds
•	 2 -17 years: Apply 2.5ml of oral gel to the affected area four times a day 
 after food and retain near the lesion before swallowing. Use for at least 
 seven days, after lesions have healed or symptoms have cleared
Or
FLUCONAZOLE
Adults
50mg orally once a day for 7-14 days (maximum 14 days unless severely 
immunocompromised); increased to 100mg a day for unusually difficult infections
Children
•	 1 months-11 years: 3-6mg/kg oral suspension (50mg/5ml) swished around 
 the mouth prior to swallowing (increases effectiveness) on first day then 
 3mg/kg (max 100mg) a day for 7-14 days (maximum 14 days; see note for 
 adults)
•	 12-17 years: 50mg once a day for 7-14 days (maximum 14 days; see note 
 for adults)
--- Page 123 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
113
15.1.2 Erythematous candidosis
Synonyms: antibiotic sore mouth, acute atrophic candidosis
Erythematous candidosis may involve most areas of the oral mucosa and may be painful 
for the patient. It can be an acute or chronic condition depending upon the duration. 
Predisposing factors are similar to those seen in pseudomembranous candidosis and 
may result from loss of the pseudomembrane in pseudomembranous candidosis.
Mainly it is associated with broad-spectrum antimicrobials or the use of 
steroid inhalers. The treatment of erythematous candidosis is the same as for 
pseudomembranous candidosis.
Where antimicrobial treatment is the predisposing factor, cessation of treatment leads 
to spontaneous resolution of the lesions once the bacterial population of the mouth 
recovers to pre-treatment levels.9 The use of spacer devices with steroid inhalers can 
reduce side effects of oral candidosis along with rinsing immediately after use.10 
Local management of denture-related problems should be undertaken before 
antifungal treatment is started.
15.1.3 Chronic hyperplastic candidosis
Synonyms: hyperplastic candidiasis, candidal leukoplakia
This chronic form of candidosis presents as a clearly defined, fixed, raised white  
patch that may be speckled or nodular. It can occur anywhere in the mouth, but  
has classically been associated with the commissures of the mouth.
Specialist management of this condition is necessary as this is generally considered  
to be a potential malignant lesion and a diagnostic biopsy is required. The timing  
of antifungal treatment is a contentious area amongst specialists.
To avoid a second biopsy, many specialists consider use of systemic antifungal treatments 
prior to the initial biopsy, clearing the candida and its histological effects first, giving a more 
accurate assessment of the likelihood and degree of dysplasia in the first biopsy. Failure to 
allow adequate histological resolution time risks over-reporting the degree of dysplasia. 
--- Page 124 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
114
Some specialists prefer to take an initial biopsy, eliminate the candida if present with 
antifungals, and re-biopsy to assess alteration in tissue behaviour. In this protocol, there is 
little guidance on sampling intervals, the risk of residual histological effects or recurrence 
of the infection. This may have an impact on the assessment making, and continued 
clinical observation of the tissue is even more important in these circumstances.
15.1.4 Candida-associated lesions
15.1.4.1 Chronic erythematous candidosis
Synonyms: denture stomatitis, denture sore mouth
This is usually characterised by inflammation on the denture-bearing maxillary 
mucosa. Predisposing factors should be eliminated before administering antifungal 
agents, but they are sometimes required as an adjunct to local measures before 
constructing new dentures.
Local measures:
•	 Strict	denture	hygiene	using	regular	chemical	(hypochlorite,	not	metal	dentures,  
 or chlorhexidine) and mechanical cleansing of dentures twice a day
•	 Leave	dentures	out	at	night
•	 Leave	dentures	out	whenever	it	is	feasible	to	do	so	during	the	day
•	 Tissue	conditioners/soft	linings	may	be	used	to	minimise	mucosal	trauma 	 
in poorly fitting dentures prior to construction of new dentures
In a meta-analysis of RCTs, no statistically significant difference between antifungal 
treatment and disinfection methods was found for both clinical and microbiological 
outcomes in denture stomatitis. The meta-analysis did, however, show a statistically 
significant difference between an antifungal and a placebo for the microbiological 
outcomes.11 
A systematic review found that topical fluconazole treatment compared with placebo 
is more effective than placebo at increasing the proportion of people with a clinical 
improvement or cure at 2 and 4 weeks. It also found that topical nystatin may be  
more effective than placebo at increasing clinical cure of denture stomatitis.3
--- Page 125 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
115
Systemic antifungals are indicated only for unresponsive infections to local antifungals, 
which are usually associated with underlying systemic factors, e.g. immunosuppression 
or diabetes.
RECOMMENDATION
Antifungals are recommended as an adjunct to local measures for chronic 
erythematous candidosis
Strong recommendation, moderate quality evidence
15.1.4.1.1 Antifungal drugs of choice5
NYSTATIN
Adults
•	 100,000	units	oral	suspension	four	times	a	day	after	food	for	seven	days, 	
 or continued for two days after lesions have healed
•	 Advise	patient	to	rinse	the	liquid	around	their	mouth	and	then	hold	it 	
 against the lesions for five minutes, if possible, before spitting out 
•	 Avoid	rinsing,	eating	or	drinking	immediately	after	use
Children
1 month-18 years: Use adult dose as above
Or
MICONAZOLE 
Adults
Remove dentures and apply 5-10ml of oral gel to the affected area four time a 
day, until 48 hours after the lesions resolve. The dentures can be reinserted to 
keep the gel in place
continued on next page
--- Page 126 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
116
Children
2-17 years old: Apply 2.5ml of oral gel to the affected area four times a day, 
until 48 hours after the lesions resolve. The dentures can be reinserted to keep 
the gel in place
FLUCONAZOLE
Adults
50mg once a day for 7-14 days (maximum 14 days unless severely 
immunocompromised; these patients should be referred for specialist or 
management); increased to 100mg a day for unusually difficult infections
Children
•	 1 months-11 years: 3-6mg/kg oral suspension (50mg/5ml) swished around 
 the mouth prior to swallowing (increases effectiveness) on first day, then 
 3mg/kg (max 100mg) a day for 7-14 days (maximum 14 days unless severely 
 compromised; these patients should be referred for specialist management)
•	 12-18 years: 50mg once a day for 7-14 days (maximum 14 days unless 
 severely immunocompromised; these patients should be referred for 
 specialist management)
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Take	a	detailed	medical	history
•	 Identify and alleviate any predisposing factors, e.g. poorly fitting dentures
•	 Microbiological	sampling	and/or	blood	tests,	PCR	assay	where	necessary, 	
 e.g. immune depressed patients, differential diagnosis, invasive candidosis
•	 Biopsy	with	hyperplastic	candidosis	to	discard	the	existence	of 	epithelial	
 dysplasia 
•	 Stress	importance	of 	good	oral	hygiene	to	reduce	candidal	load	and	
 prescribe antimicrobial mouthwash, e.g. chlorhexidine
continued on next page
--- Page 127 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
117
•	 Prescribe	either	topical	or	systemic	antifungal
•	 Where	prolonged	courses	or	higher	doses	are	used,	(e.g. 	
 immunocompromised), monitoring of liver and renal function is advised
•	 Review	for	resolution 	
15.1.4.2 Angular cheilitis (stomatitis)
This condition presents as cracking and inflammation of the angles of the mouth. It is 
commonly a Candida-associated lesion. The condition is most frequently seen in patients 
who have denture-related stomatitis. 
As with other oral candidal infections, it can be caused by an underlying systemic disease, 
such as deficiency anaemias, eating disorders, eczema, orofacial granulomatosis, Crohn’s 
disease and immune deficiencies. A reduced/decreased occlusal face height, can also be  
a possible predisposing condition.
Angular cheilitis has a multifactorial aetiology and may be caused by both yeasts 
(Candida spp.) and bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus and beta-haemolytic streptococci) as 
interacting, infective factors. In patients who do not wear dentures, bacterial infections 
with staphylococci and/or streptococci are more likely to be cultured from the lesions. 
Microbiological sampling is useful in determining the therapeutic drugs of choice.
Predisposing factors should be managed (e.g. resolution of intraoral reservoir of 
candida in patients with chronic erythematous candidosis, provision of new dentures 
with appropriate occlusal face height after new dentures) and miconazole cream 
should be the first choice anti-infective agent as it has antifungal activity and some 
activity against gram-positive cocci. When angular cheilitis is associated with chronic 
erythematous candidosis, the intraoral infection should be treated concomitantly  
to eliminate the palatal reservoir.
In cases that are proven to be staphylococci, sodium fusidate ointment is indicated. 
When the lesions are unresponsive, a combination of miconazole with hydrocortisone 
maybe effective.
--- Page 128 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
118
RECOMMENDATION 
Topical antimicrobial therapy is recommended as an adjunct to 
management of underlying and predisposing conditions for angular cheilitis
(Strong recommendation, low quality evidence)
15.1.4.2.1 Antifungal drugs of choice
MICONAZOLE
Adults and children
Apply cream to the angles of the mouth twice a day for 10 days or until lesions 
have healed
Or
SODIUM FUSIDATE
Adults and children
Apply ointment to angles of the mouth three to four times a day usually for 7 days
Or
MICONAZOLE AND HYDROCORTISONE
Adults and children
Apply cream or ointment to angles of the mouth twice a day for a maximum 
of seven days
Note that creams are used on wet surfaces and ointments on dry surfaces.
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 Take	a	comprehensive	medical	and	dental	history	and	oral	examination
•	 Assess and manage predisposing factors, e.g. overclosure, denture problems
continued on next page
--- Page 129 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
119
•	 Microbiological	sampling	where	necessary 	
•	 Blood	tests	where	appropriate
•	 Manage	underlying	nutritional	and	haematological	disorders	if 	present
•	 Stress	the	importance	of 	good	oral/prosthesis	hygiene
•	 Prescribe	appropriate	ointment/cream
•	 Review	in	2	weeks
•	 If 	unresolved,	consider	systemic	antifungal	
15.1.4.3 Median rhomboid glossitis (glossal central papillary atrophy)
This condition is uncommon and consists of a well-demarcated area of depapillation 
on the midline of the dorsum of the tongue (just anterior to the circumvallate 
papillae). Most cases are symptomless and the condition is currently thought to 
represent a chronic fungal (candidosis) infection. 
In general, no treatment is necessary for median rhomboid glossitis. Predisposing 
factors	include	smoking,	denture-wearing,	corticosteroid	sprays	and	HIV.	Management	
of these can be successful in reducing or resolving the lesion.
For cases with symptoms of persistent pain or a burning sensation where Candida 
albicans infection is shown to be present by microbiological sampling, an antifungal 
medication may be prescribed to manage the infection and reduce the symptoms. 
Some cases of median rhomboid glossitis do not respond to antifungal therapy, so 
blood	tests	to	exclude	haematinic	deficiencies	may	be	indicated.	Very	occasionally,	 
a biopsy may also be indicated. 
The treatment is essentially the same as for oral candidosis (see section 15.1)
RECOMMENDATION
Antifungals may be of benefit in median rhomboid glossitis as an adjunct 
to management of predisposing factors in reducing persistent pain and 
burning sensations in the presence of Candida albicans infection
Conditional recommendation, low quality evidence
--- Page 130 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
120
CLINICAL ADVICE
•	 As	for	oral	candidosis
15.2 CHRONIC MUCOCUTANEOUS CANDIDOSIS (CMC)
CMC is a rare disease in which individuals have frequent, usually continuous oral 
thrush which is difficult to treat. Most cases are recognised in childhood. When 
CMC is found in children it is usually considered genetic with immune defects or 
endocrinopathies. It is characterised by hyperplastic plaque-like lesions intraorally,  
with skin lesions and nail defects (candida paronychia) also likely to be present.
Management is with antifungals, such as systemic fluconazole or itraconazole, and  
it is best managed by specialist collaborative teams.
References
1 Samaranayake LP, Leung WK, Jin L. Oral mucosal fungal infections. Periodontol 2000. 2009;(49):39-59. 
2 Axell T, Samaranayake LP, Reichart PA, et al. A proposal for reclassification of oral candidosis. Oral 
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 1997;84(2):111-2.
3 Pankhurst CL. Clinical evidence – Candidiasis (Oropharyngeal). BMJ Clin Evid. 2013;(2013):1304
4 Kuriyama T, Williams DW, Bagg J, et al. In vitro susceptibility of oral Candida to seven antifungal 
agents. Oral Microbiol Immunol. 2005;(20):349-353. 
5 Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary. 77th ed. [Internet]. London: BMJ Group and 
Pharmaceutical Press; 2019. Available at http://www.medicinescomplete.com. The reader is reminded 
that the BNF is constantly revised; for the latest guidelines please consult the current edition at www.
medicinescomplete.com.
6 Hoppe JE, Hahn H. Randomized comparison of two nystatin oral gels with miconazole oral gel  
for treatment of oral thrush in infants. Antimycotics Study Group. Infection. 1996;(24):136-139. 
7 Goins RA, Ascher D, Waecker N, et al. Comparison of fluconazole and nystatin oral suspensions  
for treatment of oral candidiasis in infants. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2002;(21):1165-1167. 
8 Flynn PM, Cunningham CK, Kerkering T, et al. Oropharyngeal candidiasis in immunocompromised 
children: a randomized, multicenter study of orally administered fluconazole suspension versus 
nystatin. The Multicenter Fluconazole Study Group. J Pediatr. 1995;(127):322-32.
9 Soysa NS, Samaranayake LP, Ellepola AN. Antimicrobials as a contributory factor in oral candidosis  
– a brief overview. Oral Dis. 2008;(14):138-43.
10  Lavorini F, Fontana G. Targeting drugs to the airways: the role of spacer devices. Expert Op Drug 
Deliv. 2009;6(1):91-102.
11  Emami E, Kabawat M, Rompre PH, et al. Linking evidence to treatment for denture stomatitis:  
A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Dent. 2014;42(2):99-106.
--- Page 131 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
121
GUIDANCE	 DEVELOPMENTA1
1.1 BACKGROUND
The Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) (FGDP[UK]) and the Faculty of Dental 
Surgery (FDS) at the Royal College of Surgeons of England are committed to improving 
and maintaining standards of patient care and positively influencing oral health 
through education and the provision of evidence-based guidelines.
The Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) is the only academic professional 
membership body in the UK specifically for general dental practice. Both FGDP(UK) 
and FDS comprise of members of all branches of the dental profession and many of 
the specialist societies and organisations within dentistry that support dental teams  
in providing quality patient care. 
This guidance for all dentists was conceived by the editor of the FGDP(UK)’s previous 
guidance, Antimicrobial Prescribing in General Dental Practice, in response to the 
increasing development of antimicrobial resistance worldwide and a call to provide 
initiatives to reduce and optimise antimicrobial prescribing for infections.
1.2 METHODOLOGY
The Faculties have sought, where possible, to use a methodology for the guideline 
development that follows the international standards set out by the AGREE 
Collaboration. 
Comprehensive searches with terms associated with antimicrobials (including types of 
antimicrobials) and the management of dental infections, prophylactic antimicrobials 
and dental treatment (with or without medical conditions) to prevent SSIs or metastatic 
infections, or other relevant areas of antimicrobial use within the scope of the 
guideline, were completed during 2018/9 using a variety of databases. These included 
--- Page 132 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
122
Medline/PubMed, Embase, Cochrane (CDSR, DARE) CINAHL Plus and NICE Evidence.  
No limits were placed on the publication dates of the articles.
Articles written in English were retrieved and considered eligible if they were 
systematic reviews or RCTs. Where systematic reviews and RCTs were not available, 
cohort studies and case studies were included instead. Microbiological studies of 
dental infections were also included. All abstracts were screened for relevance,  
and full text articles retrieved and critically appraised for inclusion. 
Systematic reviews that fulfilled five conditions were included: (1) a clear and  
focused question of relevance to the scope of these guidelines, (2) a comprehensive 
search strategy, (3) a quality assessed methodology, (4) a clearly presented report of  
the included RCTs, and (5) a comprehensive and critical discussion of the results.
Where evidence was not available from systematic reviews, RCTs from the last 30 years 
were included. These answered a focused question within the scope of the guidance  
and, wherever possible, complied with standards (e.g. CONSORT) for reporting 
randomised trials.
Cohort and case studies were included where neither systematic reviews, nor RCTs, 
could provide evidence within the scope of the guideline, and where possible,  
followed recognised standards (e.g. STROBE) for observational studies.
Other sources of evidence, such as existing guidelines and expert working groups,  
were also considered and appraised for relevance and quality. GRADE was used to 
assess and rate the quality of the evidence and to make recommendations.
Some members of the working group drafted sections of the guidelines summarising  
the evidence available, providing recommendations and clinical advice. This was 
collated into a draft document and distributed to all members of the guideline 
development group (GDG). The GDG was asked to review the content and reach 
consensus on the recommendations. Where there was no evidence or conflicting 
evidence, the GDG was asked to make consensus recommendations based on  
current best practice or expert opinion.
--- Page 133 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
123
Antimicrobial drug regimens and choices for each of the areas within the scope of 
the guidance were based on the recommendations of the BNF, published literature 
on microbiological sampling surveys for dental infections, and RCTs where specific 
antimicrobial regimens were investigated using the aforementioned databases.
1.3 PEER REVIEW
The draft guidelines were peer reviewed, and following assessment of comments 
received, edited accordingly. The Faculties wish to thank the following peer reviewers 
for their involvement in developing these guidelines:
Prof Tara Renton
Prof Andrew Smith
Prof Jan Clarkson
Dr Doug Stirling
1.4 CONSULTATION 
To evaluate the guidance, a six weeks external consultation was conducted from 10th 
February 2020 to 22nd March 2020. The consultation draft was sent to a wide range 
of organisations and individuals within dentistry and in the field of antimicrobial 
prescribing and stewardship. The consultees were a selection of end users in all sectors 
of clinical dentistry, and were contacted through the FGDP(UK) and FDS networks. 
The Faculty of General Dental Practice UK and the Faculty of Dental Surgery would  
like to express their thanks to the following organisations and individuals for 
consulting on the draft guidance: 
The Association of Dental Hospitals (ADH)
The British Association for the Study of Community Dentistry (BASCD)
The British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy (BSAC)
The Bristol Dental Hospital and School
The FGDP(UK) Implant Diploma Leads
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
The Scottish Antimicrobial Prescribing Group – Dental sub-group
The Royal Pharmaceutical Society (RPS)
--- Page 134 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
124
Adrian Bennett
Igor R. Blum  
Tom Cheung
Mark-Steven Howe
Yann Maidment
Tara Renton
Catherine Rutland
Pearse Stinson
Cemal Ucer 
Jane Woodington
Simon Wright 
Following completion of the consultation period, all comments were reviewed and  
the guidance amended accordingly.
1.5 REVIEW AND UPDATING
A review of this guidance will take place four years after publication. If in the interim 
new evidence and working practices become available, this will be assessed and, if 
appropriate, the guidance updated. This will be completed as soon as possible on  
the online version available on the Faculties’ websites.
--- Page 135 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
125
THE	 GUIDANCE	 DEVELOPMENT	 GROUP	 (GDG)A2
A Guidance Development Group (GDG) consisting of individuals from a cross  
section of dentistry was formed to develop and write this guidance. The GDG  
included representatives from all relevant dental specialities, a pharmacist  
and a patient representative. 
2.1 MEMBERSHIP OF THE GDG
Nikolaus Palmer* (Chair and FGDP(UK) lead) General Dental Practitioner, Clinical 
Adviser in Dental Education, Research Fellow, Health Education England North West 
Thayalan Kandiah (FDS lead) Paediatric Consultant, East Surrey Hospital
Noha Seoudi* Senior Lecturer, Specialist in Clinical Oral Microbiology,  
Institute of Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London
Richard Cook Professor of Diagnostic Technologies and Oral Medicine,  
Hon Consultant in Oral Medicine, Kings College London
Iain Mc Vicar Consultant Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon,  
Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham
Mark Ide* Reader in Periodontology, Hon Consultant in Restorative Dentistry,  
Kings College London
Christine Randall* Pharmacist, Assistant Director, North West Medicines  
Information and National Dental Medicines Information Service
Laura Hyland* Consultant in Special Care Dentistry,  
Birmingham Community Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust
Colette Balmer Consultant in Oral Surgery, Hon Senior Lecturer,  
University of Liverpool
--- Page 136 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
126
Amy Patrick* Registrar in Oral Surgery, Eastman Dental Hospital, University College 
London Hospital, Speciality Doctor Paediatrics, East Surrey Hospital
Trevor Johnson General Dental Practitioner, Senior Dental Officer,  
Defence Primary Health Care
Maria Clark Patient representative 
*Contributing authors
2.2 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
All contributors were required to declare any potential conflicts of interest during  
the development of this guideline. There were no conflicts of interest.
--- Page 137 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
127
ANTIMICROBIAL STEWARDSHIP RESOURCESA3
Antimicrobial stewardship is an organisational or healthcare system-wide approach 
to promoting and monitoring judicious use of antimicrobials to preserve their future 
effectiveness. It is the use of antimicrobials at the right dose, frequency and duration 
where clinically indicated that results in the best clinical outcome for treatment or 
prevention of infection for patients.
The following links provide tools for prescribers of antimicrobials to help put the 
recommendations in this guidance into clinical practice and to promote judicious  
use and monitoring of antimicrobial prescribing. 
1 NICE Guidance on Antimicrobial stewardship  
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng15 
2 Health Education England AMS Training resource guide  
https://www.hee.nhs.uk/sites/default/files/documents/AMR%20Training 
%20guide%20v16.pdf
3 Public Health England AMS resource handbook  
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/768999/PHE_AMR_resource_handbook.pdf
4  Public Health England Dental AMS toolkit  
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/dental-antimicrobial-stewardship-toolkit
5 British Association of Oral Surgeons Dental AMS e-learning modules  
https://www.baos.org.uk/elearning/
6 Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Antimicrobial self-audit clinical toolkit  
https://www.fgdp.org.uk/antimicrobial-prescribing
7 Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Dental patient information leaflet  
and poster  
https://www.fgdp.org.uk/sites/fgdp.org.uk/files/docs/in-practice/ab_leaflet.pdf 
https://www.fgdp.org.uk/sites/fgdp.org.uk/files/docs/in-practice/ab_poster.pdf
--- Page 138 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry
Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)  
Faculty of Dental Surgery
128
8 Health and Social Care Act 2008. Code of Practice on the prevention  
and control of infections and related guidance 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/
attachment_data/file/449049/Code_of_practice_280715_acc.pdf
--- Page 139 ---

--- Page 140 ---
Antimicrobial Prescribing  
in Dentistry