                                                                                 A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

Example title

Example heading one

Example heading 2

Example heading 3
Sitiataturis magnatq uoditas anda sust, il et ma im adia invellam lab inveles expliquas eat
andiati dolo invellu ptatiis sum reicatu reptatusdae nonsequamus.

A Guideline for the Extraction of First Sum aut perferisita voluptate oditium aut eosae platemped ut et et volendamus sapientur?

Sandendunt essimus moditat ectatur a dem simus ne nimilitio optatendant eum nis delectur,

Permanent Molars in Children alitam as doluptas vel ium sam aciatem nimodit asperibus ipsam quam et aut por aceatium,

santori rerum excerro incimodis sam vella none sit, et eatempo rectotatus et qui sin re mi, te
vendi de posantia cullacea que periati velloraerum quiassim apediti odipsum dita eostinum
rent.
On non nost, sedit aut utem quiatque eossita tiunto comnihit volecte nem estrum que nemodic
torecus incia dolorer uptatur soluptiatur aturehe ntectusae mi, idelis ex esed ese sit verent et
aut ut volum evendit ibusciet quasit odis sunt qui sam dolene nonsed quodior iberios ea de
volo coneceris alia inte liqui auda sum autatem. Nequam doluptatis vellab iligent magni unt.
Cuptaec totati atque nat ea num es eatum facesed itionsecab ium eseditatur, que eat vellupta

March 2023 dolorrum aut vendene di berum sam vernam que ne coneseque ius num qui ditasse catur?

Fugit doluptae volendis utatum ut alignimusam lam, voluptat officimi, te nulparchil eiusdae
perepre pererum quodis maximi, ut am in poritatium lacerae reperro venime nistrum dolupta
quaspitati utat.
Duciusdae plaborest et acerumqui se voluptatur, omnitat umentibus, suntio dolorum doles
doleni ut officia comnis delenectem quiae alicit arumetumendi quis et ma vel erercid ut harum,
simint etur asitat.
Tem alita veliquae voloreped qui cuptae net laborem volorib eriatum vollibu saperunt,

                                                                                                                                                                          1
A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

Joe Noar, Greig Taylor, Paul Ashley, Alison Williams, Mike Harrison, Martyn T Cobourne

(An update of the 2014 guidelines written by M T Cobourne, A Williams and M Harrison)
(An update of the 2009 guidelines written by M T Cobourne, A Williams and R McMullen)

1                                                                     The Royal College of Surgeons of England
                           A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

Introduction

Children continue to present with a developing dentition affected by one or more compromised first
permanent molars (FPM) with an uncertain prognosis. This places a burden of disease on each child
that can lead to sensitivity and pain, complex restorations or extractions and disruption to the functional
occlusion. When correctly planned, interceptive extraction of the FPM can be followed by successful
eruption of the second permanent molar (SPM) to provide a suitable replacement, and ideally third
molar eruption (TPM) to complete the molar dentition. However, FPM extraction can lead to poor
positioning of adjacent teeth and a poor functional occlusion, requiring orthodontic management where
appropriate, for definitive correction.

» For these reasons, the elective extraction of compromised FPMs with an uncertain long-term
    prognosis should always be considered within the context of the patient and their underlying
    occlusion; and

» FPM treatment-planning decisions should ideally be made following input from both the general
    dental practitioner (GDP) or paediatric dentist and a specialist orthodontist.

Development of the first permanent molar

The FPM is derived from the primary dental lamina and evidence of early formation is usually present
by week 17 of gestation in the human embryo (Ooe, 1981):

» Hard tissue formation is generally initiated in these teeth by birth and coronal development is
    complete by the third year of life;

» Eruption of the FPM occurs around the age of 6-7 years;
» Root formation is complete by the age of 9-10 years (Berkovitz et al., 2017; Nanci, 2017);
» The timing of coronal mineralisation makes FPM teeth susceptible to chronological and systemic

    enamel defects, which can lead to localised hypomineralisation and/or hypoplasia (Leppaniemi et
    al., 2001).

Why is the FPM a particular problem?

The FPM is often one of the first permanent teeth to erupt as the child enters the mixed dentition.
Combined with a degree of inaccessibility at the back of the oral cavity, this can make it susceptible to
dental caries if subjected to unfavourable conditions in the young child. Whilst caries experience has
continually fallen in the permanent dentition of UK children over the last forty years, the most recent
data has demonstrated that around one third of UK 15 year-olds still have experience of caries into
dentine in at least one of their permanent teeth (Child Dental Health Survey, 2013).

Molar-Incisor-Hypomineralisation (MIH) is a systemic condition with a poorly understood aetiology, that
is increasingly being seen and characterised by demarcated and qualitative enamel defects variably
affecting the FPM and permanent incisor teeth (Jalevik, 2010; Kuhnisch et al., 2012), Post-eruptive
breakdown of FPM coronal enamel is common and can lead to sensitivity, increased caries risk and
challenging restorative care. MIH is a significant factor in paediatric dental care and requires careful
treatment planning with affected children requiring specific care pathways.

Why is planning for the FPM of poor prognosis so critical?

Enforced extraction of poor prognosis FPMs can cause disruption to the functional occlusion and
impact on successful eruption of the SPM, particularly in terms of spontaneous space closure and
final SPM position. Although positive associations have been found between space closure and

Faculty of Dental Surgery                                                                                    2
A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

chronological age at extraction, angulation and developmental stage of the developing SPM and
second premolar, presence of the TPM, crowding in the dental arches and skeletal relationship
including retrognathic maxilla and prognathic mandible (Hallett and Burke, 1961; Dahan 1970; Plint
1970; Thilander and Skagius 1970; Thunold 1970; Crabb and Rock 1971). However, most of these
associations have relied upon investigations using retrospective sample gathering, subjective measures
of outcome, limited statistical analyses and incomplete reporting of results and therefore should be
considered with some caution.

General principles and practical guidance

The goal of interceptive FPM extraction is to achieve successful eruption of the SPM (and TPM if
present, to complete the molar dentition) and the second premolar teeth, with space closure, a lack of
tooth tipping and no overeruption of the opposing molar unit.

General principles

To correctly manage compromised FPMs of uncertain prognosis multiple factors need to be considered,
including those that have a wider context than occlusal issues for the patient. These include:

» The immediate clinical symptoms related to the compromised FPM tooth or teeth;
» An accurate diagnosis of the prognosis of the affected tooth or teeth and an appraisal of any likely

    future symptoms;
» The capacity of the patient to receive complex dental care ­ including surgical, restorative and

    orthodontic treatment;
» The availability of services;
» The overall occlusion or malocclusion; and
» The aspirations and values of the child and parent relating to immediate dental care and the burden

    of potential future care.

A child presenting with a developing dentition affected by one or more compromised FPM of poor
prognosis may require their immediate enforced extraction. In cases where there is acute pathology and
the child is in pain, it may not be possible to plan for ideal timing or the choice of extraction of teeth to
be removed. In these cases, any future planning may have to be done once the acute phase has been
managed. However, where there are no immediate needs, careful planning to encourage the best position
of the developing adult teeth given the available resources and capacity of the child should be considered.
This may require any compromised FPM to be restored or stabilised to allow for specialist input.

Referral to centres where combined orthodontic and paediatric services are available is encouraged to
allow comprehensive treatment planning to be undertaken and should be considered the gold standard.
Where this is not possible, these guidelines aim to support the clinical decisions that will need to be
made by the attending clinician or clinicians.

In all cases, a detailed assessment of the prognosis of all teeth should be made with an accurate
prediction of any future care needs outlined. Any restorative work undertaken on the affected teeth,
including pre-operative photographs where possible, should be documented to give clear guidance for
any future treatment planning.

It is understood that evidence-based decisions around prognosis are difficult to make. Any restoration
is likely to fail eventually and teeth affected with MIH that appear grossly intact may have opacities that
can breakdown at a later date (Neves et al., 2018).

2                                                                     The Royal College of Surgeons of England
                           A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

All possible options should be communicated to the patient and or parents/guardians. Some patients
may prefer to lose a tooth rather than have a lifetime burden of restorative maintenance and repair,
others may choose to maintain a tooth at all costs. Discussing these options should be part of a shared
decision-making process, including the opinions and values of the child, parents/guardians and dental
professional. A further important consideration is the capacity of the child to undertake interceptive
interventions. The treatment plan may be significantly modified if a general anaesthetic is required
rather than local anaesthetic or sedation, particularly if the treatment plan is associated with multiple
stages. These discussions form the basis of informed consent and are essential when providing
treatment with outcomes that are often not completely predictable and rely on favourable growth and
development for success.

The patient's capacity to comply with complex treatment must be recorded. Are there medical, dental,
psychological, intellectual or patient-management reasons why complex treatment may not be
accepted? If a child cannot cope with treatment at the time of presentation, this does not mean that
they never will. A careful assessment of whether they will ever be able to, should be made with them
and their guardians. Factors limiting the ability for a child to undertake complex care related to medical
and intellectual capacity may be ongoing and lifelong, but those relating to quality of oral hygiene and
ability to accept treatment may change over time and any assessment of capacity must include both
aspects.

The developmental age of the patient may be very different to their chronological age and it essential
that this is considered before choosing a treatment that relies on the eruptive pathway of the adult
dentition.

Features of the occlusion, such as skeletal pattern, the presence of crowding or tooth agenesis,
ectopic tooth positions, presence or absence of the TPM and assessment of SPM development and
angulation will have a significant impact on treatment choice. In particular, significant mid-arch crowding
may require the stabilisation of a compromised FPM to avoid further space loss; whilst conversely,
hypodontia may require early extraction or restoration of compromised teeth to manage the long-term
occlusal platform.

A full dental assessment must include a radiographic screen with a Dental Panoramic Tomograph
(DPT) to check for the presence, position and normal formation of the full developing permanent
dentition.

Predictors of successful SPM eruption following interceptive
FPM removal

Radiographic evidence of a SPM within alveolar bone and early mineralisation of its bifurcation have
been cited as predictors for successful eruption of this tooth following FPM extraction, particularly in
the lower arch (Normando et al., 2010; Thilander et al., 1963; Thilander and Skagius, 1970; Thunold,
1970). However, this might simply reflect the developmental stage of the child rather than anything
specific to SPM development. More recent research has identified a predictive relationship relating
to mesio-distal angulation of the SPM and presence of the TPM in terms of favourable SPM eruption
(Patel et al., 2017). These predictive factors are more pertinent following extraction of a compromised
lower FPM, as favourable SPM eruption is less of a concern following extraction of a compromised
upper FPM (Ay et al., 2006; Halicioglu et al., 2013; Patel et al., 2017; Williams and Hosila, 1976;
Yavuz et al., 2006).

Extraction of the compromised FPM when the SPM is developing (between the ages of 8-10 years)
appears to cause less disruption to the occlusion. If this window is not met and the lower FPM is

Faculty of Dental Surgery                                                                                    3
A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

extracted before the age of 8 years, or during the later stages of SPM eruption, the SPM and second
premolar can drift into the extraction space, tip, rotate and produce spacing in the dental arch with
poor occlusal contacts (Normando et al., 2010; Thilander et al., 1963; Thilander and Skagius, 1970;
Thunold, 1970).

TPM development is usually evident radiographically by 8 years of age, but it can demonstrate wide
variation and be delayed significantly. This is unfortunate because treatment planning often needs
to be undertaken before the presence or absence of the TPM can be confirmed. If a TPM is present
and FPM interceptive extraction is carried out at the optimal time or the patient is able to undergo
orthodontic treatment, there is every expectation that the child will ultimately have two molars in each
quadrant in good occlusion; and therefore, in these circumstances, it is much more acceptable to
extract a compromised FPM with an uncertain prognosis.

Where there is no evidence of a TPM, the decision to restore or extract the affected FPM is more
complex. Extraction of the FPM will potentially leave the child with only one molar unit in the affected
quadrant, leading to a reduced posterior occlusion and possibly unopposed teeth, if TPM are present
in the opposing quadrant. This situation requires a much more detailed conversation between patient,
dentist and orthodontist.

Should we provide balancing and compensating extractions?

» A compensating extraction is the removal of a FPM from the opposing quadrant; and
» A balancing extraction is the removal of a FPM from the opposite side of the same dental arch.

Compensating extraction of a sound upper FPM has been recommended when extraction of the
lower FPM is required (Holm, 1970). This is to avoid over-eruption of an unopposed upper FPM,
which can prevent desirable mesial movement of the erupting lower SPM, thus impeding space
closure and potentially inducing other occlusal interferences. There is little evidence to verify these
claims and what evidence is available is based on retrospective cohort studies, often with very small
samples (Holm, 1970; Jalevik and Moller, 2007; Mejare et al., 2005). Current evidence would suggest
that the risk of upper FPM over-eruption as a consequence of lower FPM extraction is small (Jalevik
and Moller, 2007; Mejare et al., 2005).

Recommendation: When the enforced extraction of a lower FPM is required the compensating
extraction of a sound upper FPM should not be routinely carried out unless there is a clear occlusal
requirement or likelihood of the upper FPM being unopposed for a significant period of time.

The balancing extraction of sound FPMs has been recommended to preserve arch symmetry (Ong
and Bleakley, 2010; Williams and Gowans, 2003). Retrospective cohort studies have suggested that
unilateral FPM extraction can be associated with the development of both skeletal and dental arch
asymmetries (Caglaroglu et al., 2008; Telli and Aytan, 1989). Evidence from similar study designs
suggests that the dental centreline in either arch is unlikely to be affected (Jalevik and Moller, 2007;
Mejare et al., 2005).

Recommendation: Routine balancing extraction of a sound FPM to preserve a dental centreline is
not recommended unless part of a comprehensive orthodontic treatment plan.

4                                                                     The Royal College of Surgeons of England
                           A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

General principles of management: upper arch

In the upper arch, an unerupted SPM will generally achieve a good occlusal position following
extraction of the compromised FPM (Patel et al., 2017). The upper SPM can be expected to drift
mesially into contact with the second premolar.

If there is crowding in the upper arch or if space will be required for correction of a class II incisor
relationship, consideration should be given towards temporisation of the compromised FPM until
the SPM erupts, allowing placement of a palatal arch on the erupted SPMs to prevent their mesial
movement and maintain the FPM spaces. If this is not feasible or the patient is unsuitable for appliance
wear or there is a need for urgent care under general anaesthetic, then a decision will need to be
made in terms of space requirements. In particular, the position of the upper canines and the need
for interceptive extraction of any other teeth that might be required at the time of FPM removal.
With patients who cannot tolerate complex treatment, it may be preferable to plan and manage as
many presenting issues as possible to avoid repeat general anaesthesia. In cases where there is no
TPM, assessment of FPM prognosis is even more critical for those patients who are not suitable for
orthodontic care to maximise the chances of a good posterior occlusion.

For patients who can access specialist orthodontic care, the introduction of TADs and innovative fixed
anchorage techniques has made the effects of space loss due to early extraction of the upper FPMs
much less significant and these patients can be managed with fixed appliances

General principles of management: lower arch

In the lower arch, occlusal outcomes are more variable and less predictable and the timing of FPM
extraction is more critical to ensure successful eruption of the SPM (Plint, 1970; Teo et al., 2013;
Thilander et al., 1963; Thilander and Skagius, 1970; Thunold, 1970). However, space requirements are
often less demanding, depending upon the underlying malocclusion.

Classically, radiographic evidence of early mineralisation in the SPM bifurcation has been regarded
as the best predictor for successful eruption of these teeth following FPM extraction (Normando et
al., 2010; Thilander et al., 1963; Thilander and Skagius, 1970; Thunold, 1970). However, recent work
suggests that whilst there may be a relationship between age and root development and successful
eruption of the SPM, the angulation of the SPM and presence of the TPM at the time of FPM extraction
may be more important in predicting a favourable erupted occlusal position and angulation (Patel et al.,
2017; Teo et al., 2013).

If a TPM is present, there is every expectation that the child will have two erupted molars in each
quadrant and therefore extraction of a compromised FPM of uncertain prognosis is much more
acceptable. There is also evidence that interceptive extraction of a FPM can improve the position of
the TPM in both the upper and lower jaws (Ay et al., 2006; Halicioglu et al., 2013; Williams and Hosila,
1976; Yavuz et al., 2006), further supporting removal in those cases with an uncertain prognosis.

Faculty of Dental Surgery                                                                                 5
A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

Ideal timing of FPM extraction ­ important information to
consider

This guidance should not be used if:

» The SPM is erupted ­ if it is, there is no advantage to an interceptive approach because a SPM in
    occlusion will not migrate mesially;

» Access to a recent DPT to assess SPM development and position, and the presence or absence of
    TPMs is not available; or

» There are acute symptoms such as pain, swelling or infection and the affected compromised FPM
    or FPMs cannot be temporised.

It is important that each case is evaluated independently and not simply on the basis of age or
malocclusion. The following information should be recorded:

» The immediate clinical symptoms related to the compromised FPM;
» An accurate diagnosis of the prognosis of the affected teeth and an options appraisal of any likely

    future symptoms (this should be sought from the referrer, the patient and by assessment on clinic);
» The capacity of the patient to receive complex dental care should be assessed following discussion

    with the patient, guardians and by the patient's own general dental practitioner or paediatric dentist
    whenever possible;
» The availability of services ­ the location, availability and financial burden in seeking services
    should be assessed;
» The overall occlusion or malocclusion ­ a detailed dental and orthodontic assessment should be
    made; and
» The aspirations and values of the child and parent relating to dental care and the burden of future
    care ­ a comprehensive discussion outlining the options available and the commitment involved
    should be explored.

Once this information has been recorded, the best option for the patient should be formulated with
alternatives tailored to their individual needs and capacity along with reference to the services available
to them. Once this has been done, a full shared-care discussion should be had with the patient and
parent/guardians and the best practical approach agreed. At each stage following this and after each
intervention, this process should be reviewed to consider any changes in capacity or wish and to reflect
on the outcome of the development of the dentition.

It is important to remember that interceptive extraction in the developing dentition is a dynamic
intervention that requires professional supervision and careful review. It is best undertaken through a
specialised team with the full complement of specialties and, ideally, care should not be considered a
one-off intervention.

6                                                                     The Royal College of Surgeons of England
                           A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

References

1. Ay, S., Agar, U., Bicakci, A. A. and Kosger, H. H. Changes in mandibular third molar angle and
      position after unilateral mandibular first molar extraction. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 2006;
      129: 36-41.

2. Berkovitz, B. K. B., Holland, G. R. and Moxham, B. J. (2017). Oral Anatomy, Embryology and His-
      tology. 5th Edition. Mosby International Ltd, Edinburgh.

3. Caglaroglu, M., Kilic, N. and Erdem, A. Effects of early unilateral first molar extraction on skeletal
      asymmetry. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 2008; 134: 270-275.

4. Child Dental Health Survey 2013, England, Wales and Scotland. NHS Digital. https://digital.nhs.uk/
      data-and-information/publications/statistical/children-s-dental-health-survey/child-dental-health-sur-
      vey-2013-england-wales-and-northern-ireland. Accessed Nov 2022

5. Crabb, J. J. and Rock, W. P. Treatment planning in relation to the first permanent molar. Br Dent J
      1971; 131: 396-401.

6. Dahan, J. A gnatho-odontometric analysis of cases with extraction of the first permanent molar.
      Rep Congr Eur Orthod Soc 1970, 367-381.

7. Halicioglu, K., Toptas, O., Akkas, I. and Celikoglu, M. Permanent first molar extraction in adoles-
      cents and young adults and its effect on the development of third molar. Clinical Oral Investig 2013:
      17: 1,557-1,561.

8. Hallett, G. E. M. and Burke, P. H. Symmetrical extraction of first permanent molars. Factors con-
      trolling results in the lower arch. Trans Eur Orthod Soc 1961; 238-253.

9. Holm, U. Problems of compensative extraction in cases with loss of permanent molars. Rep of the
      Congress Eur Orthod Soc 1970; 409-427.

10. Jalevik, B. (2010). Prevalence and Diagnosis of Molar-Incisor- Hypomineralisation (MIH): A system-
      atic review. Eur Arch Paed Dent 2010; 11: 59-64.

11. Jalevik, B. and Moller, M. Evaluation of spontaneous space closure and development of permanent
      dentition after extraction of hypomineralized permanent first molars. Int J Paed Dent 2007; 17: 328-
      335.

12. Kuhnisch, J., Heitmuller, D., Thiering, E., Brockow, I., Hoffmann, U., Neumann, C., Heinrich-Welt-
      zien, R., Bauer, C. P., von Berg, A., Koletzko, S., et al. Proportion and extent of manifestation of
      molar-incisor-hypomineralizations according to different phenotypes. J Pub Health Dent 2012; 74:
      42-49.

13. Leppaniemi, A., Lukinmaa, P. L. and Alaluusua, S. Nonfluoride hypomineralizations in the perma-
      nent first molars and their impact on the treatment need. Caries Res 2001; 35: 36-40.

14. Mejare, I., Bergman, E. and Grindefjord, M. Hypomineralized molars and incisors of unknown
      origin: treatment outcome at age 18 years. Int J Paed Dent 2005; 15: 20-28.

15. Neves, A. B., Americano, G. C. A., Soares, D. V. and Soviero, V. M. Breakdown of demarcated
      opacities related to molar-incisor hypomineralization: a longitudinal study. Clin Oral Investig 2019;
      23: 611-615.

16. Normando, A. D., Maia, F. A., Ursi, W. J. and Simone, J. L. Dentoalveolar changes after unilateral
      extractions of mandibular first molars and their influence on third molar development and position.
      World J Orthod 2010; 11: 55-60.

17. Nanci, A. (2017). Ten Cate's Oral Histology. Development, Structure and Function. 9th Edition,
      Elsevier.

18. Ong, D. C. and Bleakley, J. E. Compromised first permanent molars: an orthodontic perspective.
      Aust Dent J 2010; 55: 2-14; quiz 105.

Faculty of Dental Surgery                                                                                     7
A Guideline for the Extraction of First Permanent Molars in Children

19. Ooe, T. (1981). Human Tooth and Dental Arch Development. Ishiyaku Publishers Inc.
20. Patel, S., Ashley, P. and Noar, J. Radiographic prognostic factors determining spontaneous space

      closure after loss of the permanent first molar. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 2017; 151: 718-
      726.
21. Pitts, N. B., Chestnutt, I. G., Evans, D., White, D., Chadwick, B. and Steele, J. G. The dentinal
      caries experience of children in the United Kingdom, 2003. Br Dent J 2006; 200: 313-320.
22. Plint, D. A. The effect on the occlusion of the loss of one or more first permanent molars. Rep of the
      Congress Eur Orthod Soc 1970; 329-336.
23. Telli, A. E. and Aytan, S. Changes in the dental arch due to obligatory early extraction of first per-
      manent molars. Turk J Orthod 1989; 2: 138-143.
24. Teo, T. K., Ashley, P. F., Parekh, S. and Noar, J. The evaluation of spontaneous space closure after
      the extraction of first permanent molars. Eur Arch Paed Dent 2013; 14: 207-212.
25. Thilander, B., Jakobsson, S. O. and Skagius, S. Orthodontic sequele of extraction of permanent
      first molars. Skand Dent J 1963; 71: 380.
26. Thilander, B. and Skagius, S. Orthodontic sequelae of extraction of permanent first molars. A longi-
      tudinal study. Rep of the Congress Eur Orthod Soc 1970; 429-442.
27. Thunold, K. Early loss of the first molars 25 years after. Rep of the Congress Eur Orthod Soc 1970;
      349-365.
28. Williams, J. K. and Gowans, A. J. Hypomineralised first permanent molars and the orthodontist. Eur
      J Paed Dent 2003; 4: 129-132.
29. Williams, R. and Hosila, F. J. The effect of different extraction sites upon incisor retraction. Am J
      Orthod 1976; 69: 388-410.
30. Yavuz, I., Baydas, B., Ikbal, A., Dagsuyu, I. M. and Ceylan, I. Effects of early loss of permanent first
      molars on the development of third molars. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 2006; 130: 634-638.

3  The Royal College of Surgeons of England
