# 2 Years Out of Dental School - Insights for New Grads - IC066
videoId: gJNUM6JSLfE
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gJNUM6JSLfE
duration: 40:00
publishedDate: 2026-02-06
publishedTimeText: 2 months ago

[0:00] Now that you're beyond the F1, your first year of practice, did you invest in your own setup, Trimman? >> One of the biggest sort of challenges I had at the start was really just talking about costs to patients [music] in general. It ended up being sort of one of the biggest successes that I've had actually throughout the year. When you're choosing kind of your practices, look for a strong sort of support system around you and don't be afraid to sort of ask about mentorship. >> When you're young, work to learn, not to earn. >> There's [music] some days where like, oh, I wish I could have grabbed a photo of that. I find that it's always the work that you do end up doing the best that never gets seen.

[0:31] >> Last year, we made an episode where we followed a new grad into his first year in the big bad world. And it was cool because in the first half the episode, he literally just qualified and we gained insights about what it's like to be a fresh graduate nowadays and what are the challenges and thoughts that you have. And that same episode, the second half, we followed up 7 months later. How are you getting on? And I set him some challenges. I gave him some goals and tasks to complete, some career advice and all that kind of good stuff. And so now we're back again a year on. He's in his first associate position. His name

[1:01] is Dr. Trimman Alawalia. So thanks again Trimman for coming on. And in this episode you'll find out did Trimman buy a camera setup? Did he figure out a niche or specialtity that he's interested in or is it too early to tell? How is he finding communication and talking about fees with patients? And are surgical extractions and moridodontics still the thing that worry him? We're going to find out how he's getting on. And again, he gives such great insights. If you're a fresh grad, you need to listen to this. And if you know someone who's a fresh grad, would really benefit from this perspective, then please send this episode to them.

[1:32] I'll give you an example, right? I on occasion get a message like a DM on Instagram about someone who's like 16 or 17 and they are wanting to get into dental school and I encourage them along and I help them to follow people who are good at that kind of stuff, who are newer grads or in dent school, who are happy to help those cohorts. But when you've been qualified a while, you don't know, you're not familiar with the application procedure anymore. You don't know what a personal statement should read like anymore. You don't know about any of the tests that they have to do. And in the same way, when you are a new grad, sometimes that person who's been just qualified 2 years is going to give

[2:03] you much better insight than someone like me who's been qualified many more years. And so this is why in Protrusive, we mix it up. We get a range of experiences and something in it for the new grads as well. Hope you enjoy this interference cast Petrusati. I'm Jazz Lati. I'll catch you again in the outro. Dr. Trimman Alawalia, welcome back to the podcast third time. Hi, Rick. We did a cool thing where we did like a prospective study of Trimman going from student to DF1. Tell me about the demographic of your patient base. So, it's good that you were getting patients asking about this, but one thing I'd

[2:34] learned was I I really learned this in Singapore where me and my wife worked in um the same corporate. We worked in like I worked in one area. She worked like 0.6 miles away. Like that's not far, right? 0.6 miles in Singapore terms. Okay. It's it's a fair distance cuz it's a tiny place, right? But we literally work 0.6 miles away. Sometimes we walk and meet halfway for lunch kind of thing, right? And the demographics was absolutely day and night, chalk and cheese, right? So she would get a lot of younger patients and I was like doing extractions and dentures and she was doing like kids and and young families

[3:06] and that kind of stuff just 0.6 miles away. It was just come, you know, she hardly did dentures at all like the whole year whereas I was doing them in a daily and weekly basis. Really fascinating. Um and that's when I really learned the power of your practice demographics. So tell me about your practice demographics, young patient, gender, profession, anything that you can tell me. >> Sure. So um I kind of work in a very heavy area where there's a lot of sort of financial buildings sort of close by. So it's a very corporaty area, I'd say. So it's one of those areas where there's a very high influx of young sort of people who have got quite sort of high paying jobs nearby. Uh there's quite a

[3:38] few sort of financial districts nearby. So we get kind of a a large sort of population of those kind of patients and then also residentially as well there's some elderly patients as well who come through and um often times as well they have quite high aesthetic demands potentially potentially just due to the nature of the area that we're in. So I'd say overall it's like a a fairly as the name suggests mixed practice. I'd say um do you have one or two patients where there's maybe like a high carries rate and but the majority of patients are for the most part stable and they're kind of

[4:09] looking for more refinement dentistry rather than kind of undertaking a massive sort of job from start to finish although there is a few of those patients but I'd say maybe like one or two a day out of like a diary of 20 patients maybe. >> Okay. And I think when we look at the kind of patients that want aesthetic work, one of one of my mentors once taught me that there are usually they come in usually two flavors, right? The first flavor is yeah the the young professional and they're they're just starting to earn a bit of money after uni and they're like, "Oh, you know what? I want to do my teeth." Okay. And then you have a big gulf and a gap

[4:40] because once people enter into the next phase of life and if kids come along then they always prioritize their pets, their children and their spouse and then the very last they prioritize themselves, right? It almost feels like a dirty thing to to do your smile when when little Johnny might need braces kind of thing, right? So, it's one of those one of those things. And then and then so the second wave actually comes like 50 plus when the kids are a bit older, they got a bit more disposable income, maybe they're off to uni kind of thing and then now you're like, you know what, I've looked over everyone else now. I'm going to look after myself and get my smile done. So, are you seeing the 20s to 30s cohort? Yes. So, actually

[5:10] a kind of a big stretch of age range, I would say. I'd say yeah, the 20 to 30th cohort is quite predominant in sort of this area. Slight mix of uh maybe people sort of towards like 40s and 50s where they have their kids coming and seeing you as well and they maybe been a long-standing patient at the practice. So they're most of the time already stable. Uh and then there's kind of some of the more elderly population as well which is a little bit sort of fewer and far between. They're also in a similar boat of kind of 70 uh plus and they're already kind of stable and they may be looking at refining their dentures or in

[5:42] some cases even aesthetic work in those cases. A full kind of range of things but definitely have that kind of younger population that you were talking about. >> Okay. Super. Well, it's nice to talk about demographics. It's one of those things that I I don't think get enough attention that they deserve because they definitely do influence the kind of what your diary looks like. And what your diary look looks like actually is a representation of your workflow and your income ultimately. So, it's very very important to to consider these things. I'm going to ask you some questions to literally just follow up from where we last picked up. Last time you told me that um you kind of promised that you're going to buy your own camera cuz at the

[6:12] time you're using the the work camera of your practice camera of your practices camera, your DF1 camera. Now that you're beyond the F1, your first year of practice, did you invest in your own setup, Trimman? >> Yeah. So, right here. There we go. So, all ready to go. Yeah. So, I did invest in my own setup sort of immediately. >> Why is it in this bag still? I I always say you you know, you must have it out and ready, not in a bag. Why is it in this bag? >> This is just my my charging cables and stuff in there. So, I have got it ready to go. >> Okay. >> But yeah. >> Which one did you go for, mate? Which one? Let's talk setup. You know, it's like one of those geeky things like you

[6:43] know when you say, "Oh, which which car did you get?" Tell me about the specs. Tell me about the the camera you got. >> Yeah. So, I I ended up going for a Canon R50, so a mirrorless setup. Um, something that wasn't going to sort of like break the budget sort of too much, but also something that I could easily I wanted a setup that I could easily kind of upgrade as time goes by in terms of replacing maybe getting a different lens or replacing the flash. And so I ended up going for a a Canon R50 for the body and then a Sigma I went for 105 mm lens and then went for like a standard ring

[7:13] flash as I' sort of been comfortable using that sort of uh which brand ring flash is it is okay. Okay, fine. So that that's a good setup. How much do you mind telling us how much you spend? So you know it's really important to for the community. I think you know photography is one of the most important things we invest in and so if I can help give uh any price guides can you can shed some light on that? Yes, for in my case, uh I managed to get a pretty good deal to be honest on sort of everything pretty much being almost new. The body itself I managed to get for new at the time directly from Canon with uh at the

[7:45] time it was on sort of sale from like a,000 to like 600ish. Uh the ring ring flash itself I got for I think just about £100 at the time. New as well directly from Yeah, directly from the directly from Kenro itself actually. I think one of the tricks I learned was actually just going to the provider itself, Canon or Kenro. Oftent times they'll have like a certain selection of ring flashes or camera bodies which are reduced at that time. And so in particularly you might even find like with the blue light card if there's like some sort of discount you can apply to it. They also have that

[8:16] as well. So you can end up getting a new sort of body for pretty much the equivalent to a used one or maybe just slightly a bit higher price. So it's worth it. And the lens was the only thing I bought sort of used which was just from uh from sex for about £200 I would say. So all in all it came over I think just sort of around about under £1,000 which is not bad. >> That's amazing for mirrorless as well. That's good. And you you kind of future proof that so good. That's that's good inspiration. We're doing the 21day photography challenge. Sounds like you don't need that cuz you're already taking photos and stuff. Um so that's

[8:47] great. I'm glad you um did that. The next thing then well firstly let's one more thing on photo. Do you find that your, you know, for me personally, like if I've been taking lots of photos, lots of videos throughout the day, if I've been documenting a lot, I I finished the day feeling like, you know what, I had a really good day. I was really engrossed in what I was doing. It was like the flow state, whereas I have some days where I'm not taking many photos and I feel as though I didn't enjoy that day as much. I don't know if you had the similar feeling. >> Yeah, definitely. I think you definitely have those days where you're a bit guilty where you feel like you just want to get through the treatment and you sort of have to put the photos on hold. Uh, and I think it depends also what

[9:18] kind of patients you have kind of what the one was before the one that you wanted to take photos of because if you're already kind of behind, then it kind of limits what you can do. But I think one of the big things I I learned actually sort of sort of just going in practice was just scheduling, not being afraid to schedule a little bit more time for those cases where you know definitely I want to take photos of this case. And so now what I tend to do is just sort of ear mark which cases are cases that are going to be good for photos and then just booking a bit of that extra time for them so I can actually even if I'm a bit behind I'm not rushed and I can actually take the

[9:49] photos I want to. But definitely there's some days where like oh I wish I could have grabbed a photo of that. I find that it's always the work that you do end up doing the best that never gets seen. >> It's it's so true man. It's so true. Definitely been there. Uh but it's good you're bringing the extra time in. You only need 5 10 minutes extra. That's all. Especially when you're starting out. So, so well done for for getting into that and obviously it's going to help to build a portfolio and also to look reflectively at your work and help you improve yourself which is good. The next uh question I had for you is that you told me that you had like if I asked you about I asked you about fear procedures last time you said molar endo

[10:20] and surgical extractions. Do you still consider these fear procedures or do you have uh other treatments now that you think are like taking their place as the trickiest challenges? So I'd say yeah do those two definitely is still probably high up on the list in general but I think definitely having gone through DFT and fortunately my scheme was quite sort of heavy on those procedures and making sure that as clinicians we were comfortable undertaking them which was which was really great to see and so definitely that there cases that I I'm undertaking now with a bit more confidence but also I think realizing when to actually refer those cases on as

[10:50] sometimes when you go through DFT you can develop a bit of a sort of unwarranted confidence in certain procedures and start taking on everything and actually taking a step back and reassessing that look this is sort of just above the level of what it's not in the patient's best interest either for me to undertake it particularly even looking at the time requirements as well in practice they're a lot more heavy than they are in DFT and so it's is it worth the patient sitting in your chair for an hour and a half while you try and take out this one tooth or is it better that they go see someone they be referred out for like a surgical extraction it get done it gets

[11:22] done a lot quicker and the patient's a lot happier as well um particularly with regards to endo I'm quite fortunate in my practice that I have an in-house endodontist there. And so if there anything does go wrong, I do have someone I can just pop to next door who can help bail me out if I need to or just even giving me some direction and guidance. So that makes it a little bit easier in those cases where you have someone in the practice who can continue with that mentorship and guidance that you had from foundation training. That's golden because complexity assessment is something that you gain with experience

[11:53] and you learn through failure and uh it's something that if you can shortcut that like I remember visiting one of my um friends he had he was a practice owner and I just spent like the morning with him just kind of shadowing him and uh he took this radioraph of a mer to be extracted and and he put it up and he said jazz what do you think and me I was only like one year qualified and I said well it's a lower mer with two roots I think you'll be fine like I didn't appreciate that the the misial Misu root had a slight curve. I didn't appreciate that the the coronal part had a huge mo like cavit restoration and that's going

[12:24] to be uh prone to fracture. I didn't appreciate that the the roots were were longer than perhaps average. I didn't appreciate that the the width between the the the roots was was wider than actually the the cvical region. So all these nuances and things which which you can take for granted and it's it's kind of the like you you touched on it, right? That confidence. It's the false confidence. It's the Dunning Krueger effect. It's like I can do an extraction, right? But you don't appreciate those things, the sooner we can learn to appreciate those things. So top advice there is when it comes to endodontics, use these widely available

[12:56] complexity assessments. They are designed for a reason and then they will like you know measure you kind of measure the angle of a curve and then if it's more than a certain number of degrees, you know that okay, this should be seen by someone who's got a special interest or a specialist. And if you stick to those guidelines initially and then slowly at the edge of your comfort zone try and develop yourself, I think that's a good thing to do. So I'm glad you touched on that. So um Kman, have you found yourself gravitating towards a niche? Like you said, um aesthetic dentistry and so that's obviously the way to go for you, but um here here's a

[13:27] spin-off question on that, right? in this world when you have so many short form courses to go on like you you know what you're in terms of the time and money that you're investing in the the UCL postgraduate degree that you'll be getting which obviously has some letters at the end of it but in terms of the skills and the confidence nowadays you can get that from you know if you go from four five different weekend courses away and then implement implement implement so I'm interested to learn what took you down that route rather than uh the short courses route

[13:57] >> yeah definitely I would say particularly this first year, I wanted to really just sort of take my time to sort of figure out which courses were were going to be best for me and actually see kind of what I was going to gravitate towards during that first year. And a lot of the time the what I ended up going for the the UCL postgrad was mainly driven again by the patient population that I had but I had done a few other things sort of during the year as well and was kind of quietly building up sort of different sort of areas of interest as well. So

[14:27] like did my MSDS with sort of RCS England and that kind of was actually a really useful exam just for looking at a bunch of different topics in general and to see what sort of piques my interest. then just sort of writing through the BDJ as well which I've been doing again has allowed me to sort of explore upon quite a few different interest areas and I was sort of doing invited to be on the research insight writers list and so they potentially give you sort of different topics to explore and so that was one thing that also sort of allowed me to sort of have figure out a few different areas of dentistry which I would have normally dip my toes in and

[14:58] then I kind of then sort of started to look at those short form courses with sort of like third party providers and then kind of the more degree based ones at sort of universities like UCL and I ended up going for something at UCL and then I ended up going for sort of aesthetic dentistry because mainly out of all the things I had done so far number one I was getting a lot of patients with aesthetic dentistry demands and I was just found that that was the thing I had the most fun doing right now and so that's kind of definitely the area I wanted to go for and in terms of the second thing with regards to which sort of provider to go

[15:28] with in terms of short courses or sort of a university I found that when sort of analyzing both of them the university ones definitely have that higher cost associated with them potentially a bit more prestige as well in terms of you're going to an accredited sort of you know institution. Um but also I found that in general for me the course layout at UCL was uh a lot more sort of days driven in terms of there was you know about 25 plus days of teaching along with days when there wasn't teaching sort of treatment planning sessions whereas with I thought I found some of the shorter courses which is sort of no slight on

[15:58] them is that they were kind of more felt like nine individual course states rather than like a a full program as such if that makes sense. I found that the UCL1 was very much more structured. There was also exams kind of regularly throughout the year which again it depends on the person that you ask. Some people might look at that and say no straight away or they may think and look at that. In my case, I prefer to to have something to consolidate the fact that I've actually learned what they've been teaching me. And so I think for me it was really just a combination of the the number of dates that there were actually

[16:29] to learn this stuff. So not just having like one day on composites, having a few repeated days, the kind of extra support from the faculty, the fact that the course is also regulated by the university as well and that there was that kind of examination process as well to actually test that you've understood what you're talking about and sort of going from there. So that kind of influenced my decision holistically. >> Okay. Okay. Well, I think you've g some given some good reasons. And I think there's no right or wrong answer for some people that may be doing some short courses and your you know from few different people few different techniques and then be able to implement

[17:00] that straight away. Whereas you made some good points in terms of why you in particular in terms of your personality style resonated more with a post-graduate taught degree uh that is a bit more structured and I I respect that. Ultimately though, you know, you could be you could have all the letters, all the days behind you, all the skills behind you, but if you can't communicate to patients, then then you won't get to do the densory. And that's a big theme. So, I I I bring that in because we did touch on how it's difficult to talk about costs and private options confidently and anyone struggles with that, especially when you're early on.

[17:30] Has your confidence grown discussing private dentistry now that you've been has it become easier with time? Any breakthroughs or tips that you can give? >> Yeah, definitely. I would say I think probably one of the biggest sort of challenges I had at the start was really just talking about costs to patients in general and it ended up being sort of one of the biggest successes that I've had actually throughout the year was sort of being able to sort of transfer those skills that I sort of established during DFT and then bringing them into practice and initially I I thought uh when I was sort of in DFT I was managing

[18:00] to get quite a lot of positive reviews from patients on Google and such and I originally thought when I was coming into practice that this was most likely just a product of the fact that you know, I was dealing with kind of a very low-inccome area. I was providing essentially private treatment on the NHS just to meet sort of DFT requirements and such. And so I was it was quite easy to meet PE patients expectations. And so when I came to like a mixed practice or a high-end sort of private practice in like a nice area that I'm in now, I thought that those expectations could be higher and it's going to be hard to kind of deliver those same results. And I found that actually kind of the opposite

[18:31] to be true essentially. Hello YouTube producer. I know you're watching on YouTube and I hope you're enjoying this episode so far. But I wanted to highlight in case you don't know yet, we have an amazing viewing experience on protrusive.app, our website, our network, our platform. So I just want to spend a minute to show you what this looks like. On the left side, you see the navigation and when you join the app, you get a 1 minute video tour of the entire network. Now, in terms of where the magic happens, that's in the protrusive community cuz you might come for the content, but you'll stay for the

[19:02] community of the nicest and geekiest dentists in the world. We have all these polls. We have a chat group. There's always active chats and dentists helping dentists. And really what I wanted to do is create a really supportive environment that's not like the environment we have on Facebook. And it's built on the values of niceness and geekiness. If you are nice and geeky, you belong here. Now, to make this a safe space, we have a manual process of approval. We actually verify that you are a dental professional before you get in here. So, we have hundreds of applicants a day. So, if it's been about

[19:34] 2 days and you haven't heard anything, either something's in your junk or you need to reach out. If you're still waiting to join your tribe, email marie protrusive.co.uk. That's m a r i protrusive.co.uk and she'll investigate what's happened. Now, all the videos you have on YouTube are also on here, but you actually have some extra ones for free that you don't have on YouTube. So, you get some bonus content that's not on YouTube. And actually for the future, I'm not taking things out of YouTube, but some things are not appropriate for the wider public and I want to sort of safeguard that information, which is

[20:05] like dentist talk if you like. So that's why a lot of the content is only here and not on YouTube. So you're kind of missing out if you're not on here. That's why I'd love for you to join there. And if you join one of our paid plans, then what you get is access to the CE quiz like this one and you can get CPD or CE certificates and also you get our premium notes. So these are a great aid memoir or revision for an episode to really cement your learning. And whilst we have ads and YouTube places ads on YouTube, we don't have that on our network. So for the paid plan, you get to see all of the premium notes without any of the ads. And of

[20:37] course, you get to support Team Protrusive and help us to continue what we're doing. I'm just going to gloss over the Protrusive Vault, which has all our infographics and downloadables. These are all our master classes at this moment in time, and we're always planning to add more. And if you look at there's about 1 2 3 about seven of them. But actually, if you look at the replay section, some of the live master classes that I've done and some of the training that people pay for on other websites is all on there included as part of the masterclass subscription. And if you're a student, don't fear. We have a special section for you with all the student notes which anyone can access. So, for

[21:08] example, here is one on Exodonia. So, it's all there waiting for you on Protrusive Guidance. Please head over to the website which is protrusive.app. Make an account on your browser. This could be Safari, Chrome, however you want to do it. And once you've made your login, then you can download the iOS or Android app and then log in through there. So the reason to make the subscription primarily on the website first is that you get access to a free trial, which you don't get if you make an account on Android iOS. If you make it on the website, you get access to the free trial and you get our best price if

[21:39] you sign up through protrusive.app. So our best deals and free trials are only on protrusive.app. Of course, we always put the link below in the description. And thank you so much for enjoying our videos on YouTube. But it's now finally time to level up your experience. Back to the episode. I >> think one of the biggest lessons I learned was really just how to sort of adapt that kind of style of communication from DFT to a mixed practice environment. And it's really just the costs that are different. But I think they really just come in towards sort of the end of the big discussion sort of with your patient. And I think really patients at the end of the day

[22:10] just appreciate kind of your cander and just sort of thorough explanation of why the options are the best first of all regardless of the cost. And so what I [clears throat] sort of tend to do in terms of my sort of process is that I've just learned that really during the discussion section of that appointment uh is just immediately bring the patient out of the chair, get them to look at the X-rays on the computer and any other intraal imaging that I've taken. So they first have a visual representation of what I'm talking about first on and then from there just sort of breaking down the diagnosis into sort of simple digestible points like carries here,

[22:40] here, and here. And then just eventually sort of going through what the different options are at this point, not even mentioning cost because I find I found that at the start immediately saying this costs this much, this cost this much, patients then just start focusing on the costs and >> they become an accountant rather than listening about their care. >> Yeah. Exactly. They're not actually appreciating what each of those options are. And in terms of sort of ethically, you know, upselling those private options that you want to look at, they're not even going to have a chance to sort of process it until because you haven't actually explained yet why it's sort of maybe the better option in that

[23:11] case. And so after I've kind of explained what the different options are, I find in the head in their head the patient has already narrowed down which ones are sort of out of the question already. So they don't want GIC, they don't want amalgam. Yeah, I definitely want a composite because you've told me about XY Z properties. And then at that point, you can just provide a simple rundown of the costs for each of those treatments. then kind of this doing it this way, the patient gets a lot more time to think and process those private options and those bits of information that you've tried to tell them without sort of feel like you're forcing their hand to go a particular way or bombarding them with lots of information. Here you're just

[23:42] sort of simply providing them with a detailed breakdown of what the different options are. These are the benefits and so they can make an informed decision. And also I think one of the things I'm now sort of later on also being a bit more holistic is actually just also giving them an idea of what kind of challenges might lay ahead as well during the treatment and then giving them an idea of what costs they may also sort of incur in the future because I feel patients really appreciate that. Um I think a good example is um one patient I had recently he had a tooth that uh like an upperrise 7 which was broken previously rcted. He just wanted that

[24:14] sort of quickly fixed because it wasn't causing him any issues and wanted to proceed ahead with his sort of whitening treatment. In his case, I sort of took a PA of the area and it was slightly unclear as to whether there was any sort of periodical pathology present. And in this case, I can see how for a young dentists just going from DFT, it can be easy to get caught up in the promise of the private treatment that lies ahead and just sort of meeting the patient's demands, doing the textbook thing of just putting a crown on it, but not actually appreciating that the tooth's been exposed for some time. And so in that case I ended up kind of doing a more minimally invasive thing and having kind of again a senior colleague there

[24:45] like an endodontist to sort of guide me really helps in these cases. But we ended up putting sort of like a permanent filling on the tooth, reviewing it, taking a review PA and sure enough there was kind of signs of asymptomatic apical periodontitis which was a bit more clear and he was the patient then at that point was you know happy to go ahead with a private RCT with our endodontist and he was actually quite thankful that he didn't jump into an expensive crown and the way I kind of phrase it to him was that you know jumping ahead into those kind of treatments in terms of his main goal is sort of whitening at the end and you

[25:16] know jumping ahead putting a crown on it and the tooth and ending up needing RCT anyways may involve, you know, change to any bleaching trays that we also make down the line. So, it could affect what he wants to do and these costs can add up as well for him. And so, he was quite happy to sort of get that done, returned to me for the crown and then ultimately the whitening. And I found the patient that was just sort of happy with the way that we communicated everything to him from the start, provided that road map of everything and some of the detours that sort of lay ahead to his ultimate goal of whitening. But we're just sort of showing him that, you know, we're working in his best interests and, you know, trying to provide the best

[25:48] treatment from a dental health perspective, but also a financial perspective. So, you know, making sure the chairside time as well as the costs don't add up for him over time. And so, yeah, I think that's kind of one of the biggest lessons I've learned as well with regards to talking about cost to patients, but realizing that it's really just not so dissimilar from what you would do in DFT. And DFT, you would kind of be very logical and explain all of those to the patients. It's just kind of the cost is different. Ultimately, if you're putting the dental health first, the cost the patient won't mind so much. So, in the end, >> everything we do, criminal is bespoke, right, for the patient. And I think

[26:18] everything needs to center around that in our communication as well. And I think the example you gave is a great example of that. And I would encourage colleagues to to to do the following, right? That scenario you just mentioned, okay, it doesn't happen daily, but you know, every few weeks or months, you'd have a a situation whereby h I probably shouldn't restore this cuz I'm unsure about the apical status of this. you know, maybe let's do something that's more like a posh core, something direct, and then let's see how it goes, right? So, it happens on occasion, but sometimes a technique to get the patient to to understand this is that, hey, you

[26:50] know what, patient, your tooth here is very special in the sense that, you know, it's a very you you have a very unique scenario and then they know they start listening. Oh, really? What's special about me? Was well, you know, most people would go for a crown, but in your case, you know, this is a scenario. And I find that they take it in more. Now, I know it's not the most rarest thing in the world, but you're really demonstrating that actually you're breaking away from what um is common place in a way, and you're just making the language you're using makes your care more bespoke. I think that's a good communication tip to take away, and I

[27:20] think that's helped a lot of you people. I just wanted to bring that one up. So, good. Well done for for for doing that way. And I'm glad that you've enjoyed the whole journey of communication. It keeps growing. It keeps growing. And then mentioning growth, you mentioned last time capsule advice, right? Learn as much as possible from every clinician, not just your educational supervisor. Did you manage to get some shadowing sessions in or did you do you remember learning from someone other than your ES and think that you know what that was really helpful, really good some sort of mentorship that you've experienced in the last year? You

[27:51] mentioned the endodontist obviously that's one. >> Yeah. So in general actually one thing I get quite a lot of questions about this as well from some younger colleagues in terms of sort of how you go about picking your practice as well and it kind of ties into this and I think one of the things that you should always look for is having what kind of other people are at the practice as well. Are you going to end up being the most senior dentist there or are there other senior colleagues that you can learn from? Are there people you're also at your own kind of experience level as that can also hold uh quite a lot of use as well. And so it's kind of one of the things I ended up sort of looking at when I was kind of choosing my practice although I potentially didn't admittedly

[28:22] take my own advice so much at the start as it can be quite difficult to ask for help at the start of sort of uh practice and I think DFT kind of unfairly sort of drills into you towards the end that you have to really go it alone when you start in practice and it's sort of completely the opposite really and my practice in general I think's been really great in terms of my practice principal is a former orthodontist and so he's been helpful in sort of allowing me to kind of upskill and looking at my aligner treatments, selecting patients for me and saying, "Let's do this one together." Or, you know, if there's a difficult private case in general, just

[28:52] book it in on the same day that I'm in and we can sort of tackle it together. Again, sort of having my sort of in-house and there to help sort of for those difficult kind of uh cases. And in fact, he he was a former ES as well. So, that's also quite helpful to have. Um, and then also just having other dentists as well who are of my sort of similar age as well. um that's really useful just to be able to compare cases and everyone's got a different experience or background from their own set of foundation training and just a general clinical experience and they will have often like a a small tidbit that you can use and make you do something completely

[29:23] differently as well and it's just useful to have that nice sort of discussion and dialogue with other colleagues about kind of what cases you're undergoing. So kind of in summary really just sort of a lot of different sort of input from lots of different clinicians which has been really useful and again I think you don't have to take on board everything that everybody says but oftent times you'll find two or three gems from everybody that you can use that kind of makes you your own kind of bespoke clinician at the end of the day as well. >> Great. Well I've got three reflections on that. One is something like in in the sort of millionaire mindset the business guys all these gurus they always say

[29:54] always be the most hardest working person in the room. Right. And that that that's fair. Okay. I like that philosophy. Always try to follow that. always be the highest working person, but then never be the smartest person in the room, right? And so what you touched on there was are you going to be the most, you know, when you accept that job offer, are you going to be ultimately the senior person from, you know, being two years qualified? And seniority is not just how many years you've been qualified, right? People think that, oh yeah, one person's five years is qualified, one year, two years is qualified. But look, if there's someone who's 3 years qualified and they have been doing with your mindset, you know, taking photos and trying to really

[30:25] practice at the highest level and constantly striving to grow versus someone who maybe just doesn't enjoy enjoy dentistry so much. It pays the bills and they go in, they see their 50 patients, they're bashing things out. I you know I I would like to get treatment and and and and and spend more time with that three-year-old three qual three years not three-y old three years qualified dentist rather than the the 10 or 15 one who has lost the finesse and the art and the hunger for dentistry. So I think that's important. So never be the smartest person in the room. And last one is when you're young work to

[30:57] learn not to earn. Okay? Work to learn not to earn. I'm literally having this conversation with someone the other night young dentist one year out of dent school. same scenario as you actually and he's got these two job offers. One is in a fancy aesthetic link which I think all the UK dentists have heard of. I I shan say anymore and he's going to earn a lot of money when he goes there. He he will for sure. There's a lot of demand. They're doing lots of ads and he's going to be wallto-all composite veneers and he he'll do well, right? But the affiliation that he has to be careful with. But then the other job

[31:27] offer he has, okay, fine is salaried. But the mentor, the the guy who's behind the scenes mentoring and and teaching, you know, is it what a wonderful opportunity? And so you have to decide, you know, do you want to work to earn or work to learn? And there's nothing wrong with either. It's just you got to, you know, pick and pick and choose exactly which path you want to take. And I personally have always done, okay, when you're young, work to learn. The earning will come in the future. So just my reflections uh on that. And now that you're very much into the real world, Trimman, right? Very much in the real world. You know that building a portfolio is a big part. We we touched

[31:58] on it last time. How far into your portfolio are you? Have you got a a portfolio that you're proud of? >> Yeah, I would say so. I think definitely when I originally applied for kind of my foundation practices, I kind of had established like a small initial sort of portfolio and now I kind of just built on all of those cases because I think at the start you don't really have any reference to compare kind of your original kind of work to. It's kind of your starting block and then you kind of reassess it and you take more and more photos. You build up a new sort of portfolio and kind of improve on it. swap sort of certain things out and you

[32:28] can kind of see that that progression from what you were where you were originally and realize okay I actually did that terribly or I thought I was originally proud of taking a photo of and then now seeing something entirely different and it actually I'd say now I I think I've definitely quietly built up definitely a stronger portfolio in certain areas like composite work and you know just having you going on different courses and going from there really has has really just kind of helped me kind of gain a lot more insight into certain procedures and now it also helps you know with looking at your old portfolio and kind of analyzing that okay this was kind of completely

[32:58] different to how I do things now and appreciating the areas where you've improved and then kind of carrying forward those things sort of going forward really so yeah definitely I'd say the portfolio has kind of increased and sort of gone from sort of strength to strength even now I still look at stuff that oh I really want to do this better I really want to do this better uh you know for example like anterior composites or posterior composites that oh these are definitely better than what they were a year ago but there's still this isn't this area I want to improve so I'm going to go away and learn this and then just keep taking those photos and kind of improving and seeing hopefully the portfolio go from kind of

[33:28] strength to strength and keeping sort of old save copies of your old ones so that you can see exactly which ones are different, what cases you're highlighting now as well. >> Excellent. Well, Trimman, I want to just ask you a final thing then. Is now that you're where you are and you got the the plans to go into postgrad, which is great, and accumulating all this very important early career experience and getting the job and hunting and all the advice that you've been giving because people are not asking obviously. What are your final reflections you want to leave everyone with based on advice because people come in very lost,

[34:00] confused, they don't know what the next steps are. What's the final sort of reflection advice that you you'd like to pass on to dentists? Yeah, I would say the main sort of thing I would definitely implore first of all dentists to do is one when you're choosing kind of your your practices, look for a strong sort of support system around you and don't be afraid to sort of ask about mentorship as that's kind of one of the key things like you were saying before in terms of in the early stages and also just figure out what you like because going in uh every day blindly without very low self-confidence and not asking

[34:31] those questions and getting support from other colleagues is going to be quite draining and you know, an answer literally could just be one sort of knock on somebody's surgery door away essentially. And doing that and asking questions, you'll find that you'll engage a lot more with what you're doing and you'll actually find that you'll pick out start picking out niches of what you're really interested in and that will guide you to what kind of training you want to do because at the start it's very overwhelming with social media, etc. that there's this course available, this course available. You actually don't know what you're even interested in and you just end up going on a bunch of different courses and not

[35:01] taking fully everything in from them. And so I think that's probably the one thing is kind of make sure there's a good mentorship around you and look towards you know getting some of that advice so that you can actually grow an interest in dentistry itself and then figure out which kind of pathway you want to go for and then really just kind of I'd say from there I think the good thing about dentistry is that it's very multifaceted there. There's so many ways that you can upskill and there's definitely no wrong way to sort of upskill. who can try one thing, maybe not like it, and then go another completely different direction. But there's also the kind of expanding your

[35:31] knowledge side and also even delving into like the business side of dentistry or even an entirely different route like software or products as well in dentistry. And I think that's what makes the profession at the end of the day so sort of fun. There's no sort of ceiling of what you can do and you kind of you can look forward to exploring how high that sort of ceiling is. >> I'm I love that you said that. You know, there's, as I always say, there's so much doom and gloom and densy medical legal and business worries and uh is my patient going to sue me and all that kind of stuff, right? And then the toxic culture and I hate the dentist and that kind of stuff and the Daily Mail and the

[36:02] press and stuff, but it's actually never been a better time to be a dentist than right now. You can literally mold your career any way how. I mean, yes, nothing worth having comes easy. If you want your if you want a perfect day, perfect week, perfect life, you have to work towards you have to work your butt off to be in the exact scenario that you want to be in. But densry gives you that license. It gives you the license to if you want to do if you love sports and you want to look after athletes, you can literally do a degree in sports densry and you can align yourself to a football club. If you want to a rugby club and just mop up all the athletic people and

[36:33] do their density like literally you can do that today right now. You couldn't do that before. Now you can do it. Niche you can think of within densry. You can create it. Like literally, you can create it. So, I'm I'm so glad you mentioned that, Trimman. Trimman, thanks so much for for for coming on again. Appreciate your your time always the clinic right now. How can we follow you on socials? How can we connect with you? >> Yeah. So, on Instagram, it's just Dr. Trimman. Nice and simple. And just on LinkedIn as well, Trimman Alawadia. If you type in, I'm sure you'll find me somewhere. But yeah, and then hopefully >> tell me about LinkedIn. I don't give LinkedIn that much love, you know. Trim. I I I'm also on Insta and also on our

[37:05] own platform guidance, but I don't I don't really give it them love. Maybe I should do. I don't know what what's the what's the community? What's the what's the situation on LinkedIn for dentists? >> It's definitely I think a bit of a different community than it what it is on Instagram. Sometimes it's not so much showcasing work. I think if you connect with too many people, you can end up getting a lot of spam as well with sort of people kind of this product, this product. It's more I'd say probably great if you're more into kind of the product side of dentistry. I think as a clinician I tend to use it to sort of showcase work and sort of things and sort of track to track sort of how you're doing kind of academically as

[37:36] well in dentistry. So, I think it's it's it's quite nice to look at kind of what that sort of space is and there is often kind of small little tidbits that are there, but I'd say it's probably not as flashy and as showy as like Instagram is in terms of picture picture, but it's good to sort of if you're looking at sort of just a general updates from like an academic standpoint, I'd think as a dentist, there's definitely some use in using it that way. And that's kind of the way I tend to use it. And I do get a lot of messages from young dentists on there as well. So, maybe that's their preferred platform. But I think Instagram particularly is is nice in the case of uh if you're posting a case and

[38:07] you can get targeted questions around that specific case as well as sometimes people might privately message you just in general about something. So either of those two I'm happy to answer people's questions if they need anything. >> Amazing. I'll I'll be sure to put the links in show notes. Trimman, thanks so much. What have you got planned this afternoon in terms of clinic? What's your day looking like? >> Uh a lot of exams basically. So yeah, so hopefully just kind of putting into practice what I've just been preaching for probably about 30 minutes. Amazing. Tremendous. All the best, my friend. And wishing you best in UCL, new degree, new beginnings, and yeah, all the best, my friend.

[38:38] >> Thank you so much. Always a pleasure to come on. >> Thanks, buddy. I'll hit that. Well, there we have it, guys. Thanks so much for listening all the way to the end. This episode was not eligible for CPD or CE credits, but most of our other episodes are. Did you know we are a PACE approved education provider, and hundreds of dentists around the world collect CE points, and by the end of the year, they've racked up so many, and they've learned so much thanks to quizzes we have on the Protrusive Guidance app. It is the nicest and geekiest community in the world. So come and join us if you want to get away from the toxicity of Facebook and the sophistication of LinkedIn. We are a

[39:09] nice and friendly bunch. All of the same mindset, willing to learn and grow together. Head over to protrusive.app or download one of the iOS or Android apps and it'll be great to see you on there. Thanks again to Trimman. I'll put his contact details in the show notes. And as always, I want to thank the team Protrusive. There's 10 of team protrusive behind the scenes that make it all work and ensure that I get enough time with the kids, the wife, with the patients and all the educational things I do. It's very much a team effort. So, thanks again team and thank you again listener watcher. We are so grateful for you. I'll catch you same time, same place next week. Bye for now.

[39:51] Heat. Heat. [music] >> [music]
