# Am I Naughty If? Accountant Version! Expense Claiming for Dentists - PDP261
videoId: BW_TZ5iZ-B8
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BW_TZ5iZ-B8
duration: 54:58
publishedDate: 2026-03-23
publishedTimeText: 3 weeks ago

[0:00] Am I naughty if I try and claim a MSc in implantology as an expense? Am I naughty if I expense that very fancy coffee machine in the break room because it keeps the team caffeinated and happy? Am I naughty if I claim my gym membership as a business expense because it helps me stay fit and perform better as a dentist? What's the most controversial thing a dentist has tried to expense? >> Try to think of the the best Probably and this comes up more than you would think. This isn't just a one-off. This has happened multiple times. Uh

[0:31] um for their pet Chihuahua at home. And that's probably the most comfortable controversial most unusual one that does get tried from quite a few different angles. And but yeah, that comes up more regularly than you would think. Protrusive Rati, this was one of the most fun episodes I've recorded in a long time. We brought back Am I naughty if in a huge way. I asked our guest chartered accountant Seb Tracey all our niggling queries we always wanted to ask accountants. Can I claim this? Can I claim that? Things like parking expenses. I used to park somewhere and pay £10 every day. Can you expense that

[1:04] or not? What about if you want to do a masters in implantology? Does that count as a new skill and therefore you can't claim it or is there a way that you can claim that as a tax deductible expense? How about if you're an associate and you buy a coffee machine for work? This one might surprise you. Now, hear me out. If you're an associate, there is a way you might be able to buy a coffee machine of your choice and it could be expensible, you know. Listen to find out because all of these are covered. And if you wait all the way to the end and I almost forgot to ask him so make sure you stay all the way to the end. I asked Seb, seeing as that he sees and knows all the

[1:35] numbers, he knows how much income associates make and how much income principals make, when you weigh in the headache and the stress that the principal takes on, would you choose to be an associate or would you choose to be a principal? And the answer he gave was phenomenal. It really opened my eyes about what it's really like to be a principal and what you're playing for and in terms of income what it means to be an associate. This [music] episode is eligible CPD so at the end make sure you answer the quiz to get your CE points. We are a pace approved education provider. Now, every PDP episode we give

[2:06] you a protrusive dental pearl. Today's pearl is a free webinar I'm going to give you. It's going to be on demand. So, we already recorded it. It went live and it was amazing. Me and Dr. Sunny Sodhana did a live on Protrusive Guidance all about financial resilience for ethical dentists. We discussed how your associate contract can screw you over financially. We discussed case acceptance and communication. We discussed saving and investing as well as fee setting and charging appropriately. In fact, it went so well we're going to do a part two as well. But to get access to part one for free, it's not on YouTube. It's not on

[2:37] Spotify. It is on Protrusive Guidance. But you can join thousands of free members via the community plan. You head to protrusive.app join the community plan, respond to your emails to make sure you can prove that you are a dental professional. And once we let you in, head over to our free podcast and video section and you will see it there. It's called financial resilience webinar replay. This just might be the most powerful thing you watch on finances all year. Second to maybe this one cuz this one's actually really good. And this podcast of course will be a close second. If you're already on the app of course, please check it out. And we're going to be organizing part two very soon. So, this is your call to join the

[3:08] nicest and geekiest community of dentists in the world on Protrusive Guidance. And once you make an account, you can then download our iOS or Android app. So, don't miss that webinar and I'll catch you in the outro. Let's head over to the main episode Am I naughty if? Seb Tracey, welcome to the Protrusive Dental Podcast. So nice to have you. You guys, Humphrey are my accountants. Have been so for some years. And before I ask like a for a formal introduction of of yourself, I have to say that for the past we see the podcast been around since like I don't know 7 8 years now. But for the past 5 years in particular, on a monthly basis

[3:39] I get pitched by an accountant to come on the on the show, right? >> Okay. >> this is the first time we actually got an accountant. The reason I've always hesitated is because the rationale of that of that accountant who who reaches out to me is to get in front of hundreds and thousands of dentists, okay? There's isn't their business interest to do so. And my worry always is is haven't haven't tried them. Haven't given them a go. What what if someone takes them up on the on the back of it and I've had the you know scenarios before where people have bought a product or

[4:09] something hasn't been quite right and I've always felt bad. And so I take it very seriously when it comes to something as important as choosing your your accountant. Now, I can vouch for you guys. You be a guys in good. I just want to make it very clear from the start of this podcast that whilst I pay you money for other services, beyond that we don't have a financial relationship and I just I the reason I picked you guys because A, the community wanted it. My community has been asking me for a long time, can you get an accountant on the podcast to ask those niggling questions that we all have? And I thought who better than my

[4:40] own accountant. So, thanks for coming on, Seb. Yeah, thanks. >> us about Humphrey & Co and what you guys do. Super. Yeah, well thank you for the the invitation, Jazz. Yeah, great to be on the podcast. So, yeah, Humphrey & Co chartered accountants. We're based on the South Coast but act for accountants all over the country and technically I guess across the world as well and international affairs too. But yeah, we're one of the larger dental accountants in the country. A lot of foundation dentists that are listening, associates, practice owners have probably heard us speak or seen us at some point. Quite a large presence there. We do a lot of seminars, webinars. And yeah, you see it's trade

[5:12] shows and bits and pieces like that. So, hopefully people are familiar with us. But if they're not, yeah, we're one of the larger dental accountants. What that essentially means is there's a group of us within the firm who specialize in pretty much working with nothing but dentists. So, for myself personally it's probably about 90% of my client base is dentists or their relatives normally. We just have that sort of offshoot to sort of help on the cost family affairs. But yeah, predominantly working just with dentists in that sort of medical underlying of the health care medical sector. So, there's a lot that we haven't seen within that. As I said, all the way from sort of that sort of start up as a sort of FD level all the way through to people sort of acquiring

[5:42] their first practice then their third, fourth, fifth practice and beyond. And everything in between cuz we know dentistry dentistry there are they both can get quite complicated quite quickly. So, yeah, we're always sort of alongside to make sure that there is not a lot we haven't seen and not a lot we aren't able to advise on. That's it. And that's exactly why I thought okay, be great to ask you some questions because you've seen it all, right? From from someone who's 1 year out of dental school to someone who's or thinking about retiring. You've seen the whole amount, acquisitions, mergers, all that kind of stuff. So, I have loads of questions for you mostly inspired by the community.

[6:12] And there's a game we like to play on the show. We play it even with our clinical guests as well. It's like Am I naughty if? And I thought that this entire episode could be Am I naughty if? Cuz I I know you guys get bombarded. I'm sure over the past years if I check my emails and conversations we've had over the last 5 years, not me directly my my direct port call is Karen obviously. But I'm sure a few times she would have raised an eyebrow about hey, why is Jazz trying to ask this question? No, you cannot expense this, Jazz. [laughter] And you know, but but you know, the

[6:42] other flip side of it is when it comes to the year end, sometimes Karen's like hey, did you account for this or did you account for that? And there are sometimes things that you will suggest that I haven't remembered to expense. So, how about we start with that first, okay? Yeah, of course. >> some common things that dentists forget to expense or they didn't realize actually we can expense this? Yeah, of course. So, from I'd say from one that applies to pretty much every dentist so all the way as I said from sort of associate level all the way up to practice owners, thing that mobile phone bill. So, practice owners might think

[7:12] that a bit more. Associates tend to forget that. They tend to forget that actually they're using their phone to work. They'll be checking emails. When they go home, they'll probably continue doing their CPD. So, yeah, phone bill is a really common one particularly the associate level I'd say that tends to get forgotten. Got to always claim the entire phone bill cuz there's a personal element there. But we can claim a proportion of that on the basis that you are using your phone for quite a large portion of work times. Yeah, phone one is one often forgotten about. So, use of home as office is another really common expense that people tend to forget about or don't really think about too much. So, we do

[7:43] add it in automatically but it's something that clients don't really come to us expecting. And whilst we claim to standard amounts particularly when you get to that practice owner level, there may be more complex calculations that we could do to basically increase the amount we can claim for the use of home as office. People forget how much they do work from home. I think people sort of come home from from surgery and think that's it for the day. But actually before they know it, they're sitting on their phones there doing emails, thinking about business, having a conversation, logging on probably to a laptop or PC or something and doing some planning, thinking about advertising. So,

[8:14] yeah, that's another really common one use of home as office. So, we might cover a bit later but maybe most motor running expenses is it's not so uncommon that it's often forgotten about but I think there's probably a misunderstanding. And because there's a misunderstanding, some people go straight to well, I can't claim anything at all. So, that's when they tend to stop recording things, keeping receipts and notes of mileage cuz they just assume that they can't claim anything. Motor running expenses is another really common one because again at the associate level, there might not be a huge amount to claim but there's usually something. Lots of conferences occur throughout the year. I think people forget you

[8:44] when we're doing accounts, we're looking at things sometimes close to 2 years after something's actually happened. You know, if you think sort of take April 26, we're not going to do that tax return for at least for another year. And people are getting close to that 31st of January. That's nearly 2 years away. And they'll forget how much travel they've done during that year outside of their normal commute for work purposes. The odd trip to the lab that sort of crops up a bit more than people expect now for everyone at all levels. So, yeah, keeping notes of mileage and the fuel receipts, whilst you won't get everything, there's usually something in there that could be claimed. And that's

[9:14] usually forgotten about because there's this a misunderstanding that you can't claim anything at all. People go sort of go well, I won't keep anything. So, yeah, that's probably another really common one. Outside of Just just on that in terms of let's say when I I remember when I was sole trader and I used to go on conferences, I used to basically my my logging was the fact that A, I went to the conference and obviously I paid for it so the the receipt was there. And you guys know my home address. So, it was the mileage from my home to drive into the conference and back. And then it would just go in a simple spreadsheet. And at the end of the year I'd say okay,

[9:45] this year I did 800 miles. And then that's something that is like I can I can claim as an expense. Is is that the level of record keeping that you're expecting? >> That's exactly perfect. So, yeah, what you're looking for is if you're claiming mileage, you're looking for a mileage log basically to say these are the trips that I've done that qualify. So, you have home-to-work commuting is usually excluded, but it's bits outside of that. So, yeah, your home to a conference, you know the mileage. Um keeping a track of that, how many miles at the end of the year, we then calculate what we can claim for that. So, it's normally a flat rate of 45 p per mile, which is meant to

[10:15] really encompass not just the fuel itself cuz the fuel always going up, but it's around sort of 17-18 p per mile actual the cost of fuel, but also it covers things like the wear and tear of your car, insurance, repairs, all that other stuff that goes with that. So, the idea of 45 p per mile is it's kind of an all-encompassing claim that the capital of that. So, all you basically need is just a note of the number of miles you've done. Um and yeah, there's no fixed period. There's no sort of set amount we're expecting to see. A lot of young dentists will do a lot of conferences and courses and those sort of bit. Dentists at the other end of the spectrum might be thinking actually

[10:46] don't need to need to go as much as I used to. So, it goes down quite quickly. So, there's no sort of set answer what we'd expect to see on average. It is all different and that's why it's so important to keep those mileage logs, keep detailed records, and at the end of the year discuss that with your accountant and make sure you're claiming as much as you can. But yeah, without the record, it's very hard to know what could be claimed. There's no sort of generic yeah, this is this is an average, we can use that on that basis cuz every dentist is so different. >> So, uh mobile phone, use of home, motor expenses. The one that usually uh I forget about is or the the guy the thing that you guys add on quite rightly so is

[11:17] laundry. Yeah. Yeah, laundry and cleaning >> expense that. So, you guys just put a a nominal amount on that that is reasonable. Yeah, absolutely. Laundry and cleaning and actually sort of printing, postage, and stationeries are other sort of falls into that category of things that you probably don't have individual receipts for or even remember spending any money on. Um and we add those in you automatically. And dental specialists, what they're looking to do is to know, you know, you guys have to launder your scrubs at 60° I believe it is. I think that's the recommended uh level. So, yeah, they should be done in separate washes. So, we've done sort of calculations in the background to work out actually across a year number of

[11:48] washes you guys should be doing of your scrubs, what that sort of works out as. And we said every year we sort of assess that figure, adjust it for inflation, etc. But yeah, there's a a fixed sum amount. So, we're not expecting to see dry cleaning receipts and bits and pieces like this. Some do. There are some dentists out there who do have them dry cleaned special specially and they will have receipts and say that this is how much. Inevitably, we actually usually find that the fixed rate claim ends up working out more because they probably misplaced a couple of receipts as well and forgotten how many times they've actually been. So, yeah, laundry and cleaning and yeah, like I said, printing, postage, and stationery, all these bits and pieces you really do

[12:19] pretty just forget that you've spent money on for work. And because it's only sort of four or five pounds here or there, it's easy not to care. But across the course of a 12 months, that can add up to a few hundred pounds potentially. So, yeah, printing, postage, and stationery is another one. And just general sundry expenses I'll put into that same category. People probably see it in their accounts every year think what is sundry expenses? And that's really just aimed at capturing all those other little bits and pieces you completely forget about that don't really fit into materials, labs, printing, or anything like that, but you are you do you're spending money for work purposes. Um yeah, those are the

[12:49] main ones these fixed fixed sum allowances um that you can claim. Um and yeah, they're not automatic. It's usually just a conversation with your accountant to confirm those things. And yeah, your accountant reminding you oh, we're going to include this because we assume that you've spent money on those bits and pieces. Um yeah, that's where they normally fall in. Well, I'm going to start the am I naughty if and I think uh it'll be similar or loosely linked to the whole thing about your use of phone. Actually, you mentioned use of phone. So, let's talk about a specific scenario of an associate. And this associate uh works 6 days a week, very very busy girl, works 6 days a week, let's say,

[13:19] and she comes home and she's knackered. She hasn't got time to watch Netflix. She's got to cook, she's got to rest, maybe hit the gym, come back. Uh and and but what because she's a young associate, she's really driven, she's doing lots of CPD at home in her spare time doing her clean checks and Invisalign planning, that kind of stuff. So, there's a lot of internet In fact, the internet at home is pretty much being used for work. Is it reasonable for associate dentists to claim a portion of their home internet that they're using for work? Especially if this in this specific scenario I've described, actually they're they're not

[13:50] really using it so much for for for for for for for for leisure and actually the internet is there so that I can do all the CPD that I do online. Yeah, absolutely. So, that I think that's sort of rather than specifically claim for that, I would say it's not naughty. Should we go with that? Not naughty to include that as part of that use of home calculation to say actually it's not just that cuz there's actually utilities as well. It's not just sitting there using Wi-Fi, it's sitting there using power, heat, everything else that goes with that. And that is where I think the use of home calculation for for an associate dentist ends up being higher than potentially

[14:20] for another trade, another industry because there is so much of that sort of CPD time and using those bits and pieces at home. So, yeah, I think that gets captured really rather than specifically claim for those. I think most of that will get captured with a larger use of home claim. Say actually, you know, when you're at home, you're working this many hours per week doing all of this stuff um and capturing all those costs associated with running the home. And I think what the Wi-Fi comes under that. Obviously, your phone contract, that is treated differently because that is a specific bill that's going out, something really sort of quite easy to identify and say look, 50% of that, say, is being used for the business. That's a

[14:51] good starting point I'd say for your mobile phone, 50%. But if you can demonstrate more than that, and again, this is where, you know, we talk about sort of is it naughty or not? If you are doing more than that, well, that's absolutely reasonable. If you can show that actually you have a you have a work phone. It's actually a lot more common now. A lot of associates will say I actually have a separate phone contract for um for work, where you can justify 100% then. You if you can genuinely say that's that's not naughty. You can say this is how much I'm actually using it. And that's what it always goes back to. HMRC are looking for things to be reasonable, but actually they're not always bad guys. You know, they basically just have a set of rules that

[15:22] they have to enforce. And if you're within those rules, it's fine. If it's then captured by those rules, there's no problem with you claiming more if it's genuine and legitimate. So, um yeah, I'd say back to your original question about Wi-Fi. Yeah, absolutely. Use of home, including it as part of that calculation and apportioning on that way of how much you're working at home is absolutely fine. To to to figure that out, to actually make the calculation valid for that individual, I think that conversation needs to happen between the associate and the and the and the accountant to say, "Actually, I'm paying 60 pounds a month at the moment for the Wi-Fi. Pretty much all of

[15:52] it is is work related. Here's my phone." And then that can be plugged into the calculation, right? Yeah, absolutely. So, yeah, it it's working out if you're claiming some of all of these fixed sum allowances, it's making sure that it's pretty much in line with what we'd expect to see elsewhere. So, it's having that conversation to make sure A, you are including everything that you can, and B, that, you know, if you're using a fixed sum instead, that fixed sum isn't too low or too high. Um and actually it fits broadly in line with what you're actually spending. So, yeah, having that conversation with the accountant and say asking questions is great and this sort of will probably underpin everything we

[16:23] chat about today. If you've got a question and you say, "Can I claim for this?" There's no issue with doing that. Asking that question is exactly what they're there to answer. And likewise, they're there to also prompt you and say, "We haven't seen you put this through. Can we have a chat about this? Are you spending money on this?" And that's something we might be able to include. Communication is always going to be the key there. Do accountants charge more money for a dentist uh who asks more questions and and maybe getting uh gets a bit annoying and maybe dentist starts getting worried saying, "If I ask too many questions, they might charge me more." Yeah, so it all depends on the relationship with the engagement. So, I would say for associates, because

[16:54] their affairs are usually straightforward, it's a little bit more of a sort of things are changing quite dramatically from April 26th with something called Making Tax Digital on quarterly returns. But broadly speaking, it's a it's a compiling exercise and there might be a handful of questions throughout the year. Um and most of the time that's usually just bundled up as part of a fixed fee. I think say for associates when they're out there looking for accountants, I think fixed fee services is the way to go. And you should that would include within there should be any ad hoc advice. The limitation to that is then if there's any questions that go beyond the scope of that engagement. So, you know, they're looking at a practice and they've got questions about the performance of that practice that

[17:25] they're thinking of buying. Well, that probably becomes a separate engagement, sort of a more due diligence exercise, falls outside of the annual accounts and tax return. Likewise, for practices, before that sort of day-to-day stuff, that's fine. But again, when affairs become more complex and you're looking at larger scope of tax planning, maybe inheritance tax planning, capital gains tax, etc., usually there'll be sort of separate fees for those. So, any questions on those will usually sort of attract their own fee structure. But yeah, for for dentists looking for annual accounts, annual tax return, and being able to ask queries throughout the year, um I wouldn't expect most

[17:56] accountants to really charge separately for those queries. I know you said, "Oh, if something comes up, I'll tell you more. No worries asking questions." Actually, I I personally encourage it with my clients cuz I think it allows me to to understand better. And actually, we're working with a certain amount of information. The more information you can give us about your lifestyle, what you're doing, what you're thinking about, paints a better picture of you. So, I think it's really important to ask questions and share things. And never be afraid I would you would say if a client if something changes within their life, you shouldn't be scared to run it by your accountant. It may have zero financial impact. It may have zero impact on tax, but

[18:27] ultimately, you guys pay us because you don't know everything about that side of things. So, you don't know if it's going to impact those things. So, by telling us, we can just make sure we build that in um and then reply reply maybe saying, "Thanks for the update, nothing to do here." Or say, "Actually, this is really important." And a great example of that is getting married. I think some people think oh, there might not be too much tax implication of that, but there can be, particularly when you're operating things like limited companies um particularly if there's children involved potentially, child benefit, planning for child care. All of these things do have an impact on your taxes and your financial planning. So, just keeping up to date is always the best

[18:57] way to do it. So, I yeah, never never discourage asking questions and checking things because yeah, most of the time if you're operating on a fixed fee, you shouldn't have anything to worry about in terms of asking those things and dropping those bits of information. Thank you. Next one is probably the most common gray area that I've seen uh in in our community and other dental communities online, right? And so, I'm just going to paint the picture before I go with the am I naughty if, but painting a picture of postgraduate education, right? There's so many different options out there. Now, when when we do like a weekend course, uh like we we host courses and people come

[19:29] on our course, we wholly expect them to be able to expense that fully for the business. But where things get a bit gray is when you want to do, let's say, a diploma or a master's and you know, I'll ask you whether that it make it that it actually makes any difference whatever. But when you're doing a formal qualification that's tied to university, things I've seen uh a little bit more gray and I'd love your advice on that. For example, if someone wants to do a masters in endodontics, so root canal. Now, root canal is something that we are taught at dental school and actually you don't need any extra credentials to even

[20:00] do the toughest root canals. As long as you're confident and you're active within your scope, you can do it. Now, if you want to go and do a masters, in my head I'm like, okay, well, that should be allowable, but yeah, I'll let you answer shortly about whether it's not, but where the greatest area happens is dental implants. For example, you want to do a masters in dental implantology. Now, that's something that at undergraduate you're not really taught that much about and it could be seen as doing a new skill is what I've seen online some people claiming. So, this is where the gray area comes in. Now, just to

[20:31] make it super super clear, if a dentist wants to do extra training to be able to, let's say, become a neuro-linguistic programmer, I wholly expect that that kind of fee they want to pay to do NLP, even though it might help them in dentistry, I would say that probably okay, that is not expensible and I'll let you again check that. But, am I naughty if I try and claim a MSc in implantology as an expensible as an expense? Yeah, no, great question. And actually a really really common question we do get asked this year after year.

[21:03] Lots of associates asking these questions. You're right, it is a gray area. There is no There is no legislation you would find a clear answer that will say, "These courses are allowable, these ones are not." And that anytime you get that sort of lack of distinction, you end up with this gray area where it becomes judgment calls and it becomes interpretation of legislation, from the interpretation of situation and applying that. And what usually goes with that is obviously sometimes elements of risk. So, basically say, "If you claim this, there's a chance HMRC could look at it and you would then have to defend that." Michael, with any expense. And obviously

[21:33] because of the sums involved, that risk level just goes up. It's not like putting something really, really small through that's a bit of a gray area. Basically you know what, if if HMRC did inquire, it doesn't matter and I'll provide the evidence as best as I can, but if for some reason they challenged it, it's fine. When you're dealing with these much, much larger sums, obviously that's where the risk comes in. It's making sure you're gathering as much evidence as possible. And this is always the advice, gather as much evidence as possible as to why you think that should be allowable. And you've sort of said it in in slightly different words, but you've said exactly what I what I believe is kind of the correct interpretation, which is that it is it

[22:04] is it building on existing knowledge? That's what ultimately you're getting at there. Yeah, is it building on existing knowledge? Have you done stuff on that before? Are you just building that and it's you're improving your skill set to do something you already know how to do, but make it better. And it's gathering that that information to show that yeah, you would have been doing that before or you would have learned about that before. So, keeping course prospectuses is actually really, really key to making sure you can get some of these things to be allowable. So, as I said, it is a gray area, but in in a lot of instances, they can be allowable. That's what I'll say because every every situation slightly different, every dentist slightly different. But yeah, keep

[22:34] prospectuses to say, "Look, this is something I've I've studied before. This is something I'm building on." And that then usually sort of slightly as it moves that dial towards yeah, that would be allowable. And you're keeping documentation to back it up. And that's really the key rule is keeping as much documentation as possible, discussing with your accountant, explaining where you've done this stuff before and why you think this is building on that existing knowledge. But really being honest, you know, if you are doing something which does then fall into a new skill set and it's going to lead to brand new referrals in a completely different area of dentistry that you'd never touched on until before, be honest

[23:06] and say you know, that that's the situation. And unfortunately in those situations, it didn't might not be allowable. But yeah, for a lot of situations, MScs and you and those things you've mentioned, yeah, can be allowable, but it's all about the specific circumstances. So, yeah, I'd love to be able to give you an answer that said, "Yeah, every dentist should be able to claim this." It is all slightly different. It is circumstantial, but there is there is that potential and that's I think the key. And that's that having that conversation, keeping the documentation, having a think about how it's framed and how you would then justify that further down the road. But yeah, it's not out not out of the realm of the question to at least be looking

[23:37] at those things and checking. Ultimately for a dentist, they will be doing these things regardless, so the tax relief is wouldn't you say a bonus? No one like being taxed, you but ultimately it's that it's something you're going to do anyway. If you get the tax relief, that's better. Hopefully the tax relief isn't driving the decision to do that in the first place. So, you know, ultimately it's going to improve your career and allow you to earn those larger, larger sums further down the line. But yeah, it's it's a conversation worth having, double checking and keeping the documentation as you go and making sure that you're painting a picture so that if it does get inquired into, you can show everything to HMRC and say, "Look, this is the reason we've allowed this. This

[24:08] is why it's within the legislation and the guidelines." And hopefully they go absolutely approved and and they're happy with that treatment. So, yeah, certainly possible, but needs taking on a case-by-case basis. As you said, it is a gray area. I think what I take away from that is actually most even our under undergraduate program, whilst we didn't place implants, we still learned about implants and the role of rehabilitation of patients. We covered the the basics of implants, so it could be argued that it's building upon existing knowledge. Implants are very much the remit of dentistry, obviously. So, I think as long as we have that

[24:40] building up of evidence like you said, that can really help our cause. Even things like, let's say, there are courses for dental hypnosis, for example, right? Now, hypnosis was actually a lecture at our undergraduate. Granted it was just one lecture, okay, but it was a lecture it was it was in the curriculum, it was on the exam. So, I think as long as you can provide that kind of evidence, you're in a better position there if you are challenged. Is is that the right conclusion you think? Yeah, I think so. Yeah, as I said, there's never a clear-cut answer, but if you're ever looking to build that case, the more information and evidence you've got is the foundation of that. And the more you start to build, as I said, if

[25:11] you think of it as a dial of starting of, you know, gray area, which way is that going to swing, then essentially you're wanting it to swing more, so the more evidence you can provide to that. And if I was going to talk about tax planning advice here, which kind of fits in quite neatly, I think, is when you consider, you know, the rules are you're trying to build on existing knowledge. If there's several courses you're looking at which are quite expensive further on down the line and you want to maybe think about trying to guarantee that that tax relief at that point, well, there's probably some cheaper courses and webinars you can do in the interim if if it is a brand new area, to do those to start with, maybe accept not

[25:42] getting tax relief on those earlier ones. If it is it is a sort of high risk area and say, "Actually, am I really building on knowledge or is this brand new area?" Disallowing those early ones, but then when you come to those more expensive courses, you can look back and say, "Well, actually I have I have studied this. I have built on it. I'm building on that knowledge." So, a bit of tax planning and it's it's a good way of adding a bit of insurance policy for some of these more complex areas is yeah, to have a conversation early on with your accountant and say, "I'm thinking of doing this." And then yeah, they can identify and say, "Look, if you were able to do a sort of cheaper cheaper course earlier on, we might

[26:14] disallow that and then you go on to the more expensive course and that's legitimately you saying you have built on existing knowledge because you've done that earlier course." Does that make sense? That's very helpful. So, do like a little mini course, a starter before the main course. I like that. Now, what here's another one then. Am I naughty if I put through my specialization program? Like those who want, you know, with MClinDent in the UK or residencies in the US, whatever. Obviously I don't expect you to know for the US, but let's take it for for home territory, UK. MClinDent, so by the end of it you will you will be a

[26:45] specialist, right? So, four-year program, three-year, four-year program. This could be full-time, this could be part-time depending on how many years and whatnot. And this could be like prosthodontics, could be endodontics, privately paid. By the end of it you actually come out as a specialist. Now, there's a lot of earnings component and of course there's a huge sums, you know, I mean, some years ago it was like 20 grand a year, probably way more than that now. To that level, like prosthodontics is something that's very much taught at dental school. We we know we do already do dentures, we already do rehabilitations, we just take it to the next level. So, specifically for these

[27:16] master of clinical dentistry or MClinDents, have they been allowable expenses for your clients? Hello YouTube Protusorati. I know you're watching on YouTube and I hope you're enjoying this episode so far. But I wanted to highlight in case you don't know yet, we have an amazing viewing experience on protrusive.app, our website, our network, our platform. So, I just want to spend a minute to show you what this looks like. On the left side you see the navigation and when you join the app, you get a one-minute video tour of the entire network. Now, in terms of where the magic happens, that's in the protrusive community. Cuz you might come

[27:48] for the content, but you'll stay for a community of the nicest and geekiest dentists in the world. We have all these polls, we have a chat group, there's always active chats and dentists helping dentists. And really what I wanted to do is create a really supportive environment that's not like the environment we have on Facebook and is built on the values of niceness and geekiness. If you are nice and geeky, you belong here. Now, to make this a safe space, we have a manual process of approval. We actually verify that you are a dental professional before you get

[28:18] in here. So, we have hundreds of applicants a day. So, if it's been about two days and you haven't heard anything, either something's in your junk or you need to reach out. If you're still waiting to join your tribe, email Marie at protrusive.co.uk. That's m a r i at protrusive.co.uk. And she'll investigate what's happened. Now, all the videos you have on YouTube are also on here, but you actually have some extra ones for free that you don't have on YouTube. So, you get some bonus content that's not on YouTube. And actually for the future, I'm not taking things out of YouTube, but some things are not appropriate for

[28:50] the wider public and I want to sort of safeguard that information, which is like dentist talk, if you like. So, that's why a lot of content is only here and not on YouTube. So, you're kind of missing out if you're not on here. That's why I'd love for you to join there. And if you join one of our paid plans, then what you get is access to the CE quiz, like this one, and you can get CPD or CE certificates. And also you get our premium notes. So, these are a great aide-mémoire or revision for an episode to really cement your learning. And whilst we have ads and YouTube places ads on YouTube, we don't have that on our network. So, for the paid

[29:22] plan, you get to see all of the premium notes without any of the ads. And of course, you get to support team protrusive and help us to continue what we're doing. I'm just going to gloss over the protrusive vault, which has all our infographics and downloadables. These are all our masterclasses at this moment in time and we're always planning to add more. And if you look at it, there's about 1 2 3, there's about seven of them, but actually if you look at the replay section, some of the live masterclasses that I've done and some of the training that people pay for on other websites is all on there included as part of the masterclass subscription. And if you're a student, don't fear. We

[29:52] have a special section for you with all the student notes which anyone can access. So, for example, here is one on exodontia. So, it's all there waiting for you on protrusive guidance. Please head over to the website which is protrusive.app. Make an account on your browser. This could be Safari, Chrome, however you want to do it. And once you've made your login, then you can download the iOS or Android app and then login through there. So, the reason to make the subscription primarily on the website first is that you get access to a free trial which you don't get if you do make an account on Android iOS. If you make

[30:23] it on the website, you get access to the free trial and you get our best price if you sign up through protrusive.app. So, our best deals and free trials are only on protrusive.app. Of course, we always put the link below in the description. And thank you so much for enjoying our videos on YouTube. But it's now finally time to level up your experience. Back to the episode. So, again, it falls into that gray area because you can have dentists doing very different roles whilst undertaking these. As you said, if they're full-time, how much self-employment is actually going at that at that point? So, an HMRC then

[30:55] would look at that, they'd be considering actually is this wholly and exclusively for the trade? And that's what we always come back to. Is something wholly and exclusively for a trade? As I said, it's a gray area. It needs to be taken case-by-case case case-by-case basis to assess really what a dentist is doing while they're undertaking those things. But yeah, we always go back to fundamental principles. Is it wholly exclusively to that trade? Provided that condition's met and provided there's the evidence in place to be able to show that and it meets the CPD requirements of being able to build on existing knowledge. There is a yeah, provided it meets those, you will get tax relief on those items. And and it's about demonstrating that. So,

[31:25] yeah, it's always always on a case-by-case basis because as you said, dentists can be be doing those in very different ways. And how they're doing those and how that interacts with their work in terms of their time commitment, what they're doing, where their referrals are coming from. Well, Seb, it sounds like that the part-time option of you know, going to uni three or four days a week and working practice one or two days a week is probably easier to justify than a full-time one. Yeah, you I mean that I think that's a reasonable conclusion. You know, ultimately you're saying if if you have got a trade and doing that is then building helping to build on that trade, you start to lean

[31:56] more towards that yeah, that is wholly it could lean more to being wholly and exclusively to that trade and building on that knowledge. Full-time, if you're not really I mean if you ultimately get back to the fundamental principle, you're not doing any sole trade work or it's really really limited, then doing a full-time course, where's where's the interaction about with the trade? And that's sort of the the where that gray area becomes harder to justify. So, yeah, it's always a case-by-case basis. Always having that discussion and say, "This is my situation. This is what I'm thinking of doing." And then going back to those fundamental principles, is it wholly exclusively to the trade? Is it building on existing knowledge? And that gives you a good starting point. So,

[32:28] yeah, dentist-by-dentist case. Um but yeah, there's absolutely every reason to have that discussion because it absolutely potentially could be allowable. Seb, I'm going to just pivot a little bit because Mhm. I'm just putting I'm just remembering some of my colleagues who've done specialist programs, three, four grueling years. And they told me that they're skint by the end of it. Like they're ready to work, right? Cuz Yeah. they're really like you know, a lot of these the only way they can make it work is by getting help from parents or or living with parents while they're doing these specialist trainings if they have the the the the sort of um possibility to do so. I mean, if they're lucky enough, fortunate enough. So, in those

[32:58] scenarios, you might find that when they come to actually earning again and uh when the first tax bill comes scenario and this could apply to everyone, not just this cohort I described, but I it was kind of like a segue into it of dentists coming to pay their tax and suddenly looking like, "Oops, I'm a little bit short." How common do you think this is, Seb? Do you Do you think as as as as a generalization, as a sweeping statement while brushing, we are good at saving for tax or not good at saving for tax? I'll be very careful what I say so as not to insult the vast

[33:28] population. No, I think I think on the whole I think I think education needs the underpinning. I think I think that's really the key. I think that's a more common scenario when someone is um slightly dumbfounded by their tax bill and have a massive panic because they're what they're seeing on on their bill doesn't tie up to maybe what's in their their their savings account for tax. And when that happens, I would say just from personal experience, they're usually dentists who have come along partway through a tax year, towards the end of a tax year, and haven't ever really engaged in financial education, maybe

[33:59] one of one of these FD programs that gets talks on finance etc. And they sort of stumbled into it going, "Oh, I'll fix this problem now or address this at some point." And the issue you've got is particularly from the as I said, if you talk about these sort of young dentists to start with, when you start, tax start accruing immediately. And that's the problem. If you're not having those conversations before that point, by the time you started working, it's almost too late because there's already tax accruing on your income. So, waiting three or four months to then have a conversation say, "Oh, should I be saving the tax or how much should I be saving?" It's almost a little bit too late. I mean, a really good starting

[34:30] point I would say particularly for young dentists and the first or second associate role is a third is kind of a good starting point if you're kind of right in that middle band of you know, you're not setting the world alight earning doing thousands and thousands of UDAs, you're working sort of four days a week. That's kind of the the most starting point we see. Um yeah, around about a third, 35%. That's a really good starting point for how much you should be saving every month when you get paid. Now, working the maths through there, you can see that if you didn't save tax for three months, by that fourth month, to catch up, you would have to save your

[35:00] entire income, which isn't reasonable because you have other expenses um just to be in the position where you've caught up. So, then you have to look at spreading that over further months and it becomes harder and harder to do that. So, I think what can be common is people who don't engage properly and and try to educate themselves on this can get into this never-ending spiral of always trying to catch up. And that's what we always seek to avoid. Yeah, as professionals, as educators, that's what we're always seeking to try and avoid because you never want to be in a position where you're always chasing to catch up. You want to be in a position where you're you're ahead of the game, you've got the right amount at the right

[35:31] time. That's a phrase I use a lot. Having the right amount of tax at the right time is most important thing. That's all you need basically to keep HMRC happy. Um so, I think dentists on the whole can be really good. Actually, I think you guys are engaged. You know, you invited us onto this podcast. That's a really good indication actually that the dentists are interested in this. So, on the whole I would say say reasonably good, but there are always the odd exceptions of those who I think I think they have in their mind what a large amount might look like. But if you're say earning say 70 or 80,000 pounds in your first or

[36:01] second year, but actually the tax on that is going to be potentially, you know, 20,000 pounds say. Then when you factor in things like payments on account and having to pay in advance, if you're not aware of those things, they really can catch you by surprise. So, I think having an idea and flavor of what you should be saving is really important early on. So, yeah, I think it's reasonably reasonably Dentists are pretty good on the whole, but there is as I said, the odd exception that needs a bit more management. I can totally relate from speaking to lots of colleagues on that. I think that's a there's a good spread there. We're going to do some more am I naughty before we

[36:31] do. I've got one more just an interesting question I've been thinking about actually. VAT, so clinical dentistry is exempt from VAT. So, for example, when I charge my patient for a restoration, I'm charging them for restoration. I'm not doing restoration plus VAT, right? And so, it's actually annoying for us dentists because when we buy from the trade, the trade sell us stuff excluding VAT and then then then as though we can claim the VAT back and they don't understand. However, I heard that if it's aesthetic treatment and it's not for health, then actually it could be liable to VAT. So, for example, if it's

[37:04] lots of clear aligner work for cosmetics, not for health, then once you then you know, that income from from that part if you like is counts towards the VAT threshold and maybe facial aesthetics as well. But I don't know. I'm really not sure. I haven't Googled it. I haven't asked ChatGPT. Do you know any dentists other than me in education? Dentists who are VAT registered because the volume of cosmetic treatments they do? Yeah. And it is becoming I would say more common. I think you probably sort of see this within the community that there are more dentists moving into that

[37:35] facial aesthetics cosmetics world at quite quite a quite a staggering rate I would say. You know, seeing the uptake in this. Yeah, strictly speaking I mean, I I won't go into huge This is a hugely complex and there's lots of cases ongoing at the moment or still being interpreted. Um some recently sort of big ones in the healthcare world in the in the last couple of years that have come out. So, I would say HMRC's position isn't completely conclusive yet. We're still waiting on a lot of cases to go through on this. Yeah, broadly speaking and not to over-generalize, but yeah, cosmetics could be caught within the world of VAT

[38:05] being being a taxable supply. So, if you're an associate dentist and you are doing a small amount of facial aesthetics and cosmetics work, but predominantly your bread and butter is clinical dentistry, there is no reason there is no reason to panic. It's really you have you have to be doing taxable supplies. So, when I say taxable supplies, those are the items that fall within the scope of VAT. So, these things we mentioned, they have to be at 90,000 pounds turnover before you have to register. So, yeah, if you're doing small amounts, which I think a lot of dentists probably are and the vast majority of I speak to, they fall into that category of they're doing some, but

[38:35] not not not vast amounts. But if you were doing vast amounts, if you did have a specialist clinic looking at that, a conversation about VAT cuz it is very complex cuz whether a healthcare provision applies to certain things or not is a much debated and whether you're it's a referral etc. You know, there's a lot a lot of complex stuff here. It's I wouldn't say it's a gray area, but it's something that needs a lot of consideration at a granular level, not a sort of sweeping statement to say yes or no. But yeah, broad broad bones, you know, cosmetic dentistry could fall within that realm and there could be could be VAT

[39:06] implications of doing that work. Okay, I mean, I think I don't want to go too much into that because it's like you said, it's a it's a developing area. There's Yeah, absolutely. lots of nuances there. But it may be something that a lot of people didn't know about and they're like, "Oh, okay, that's interesting." I don't think there's many people who fall into that bucket, but like you said, if they have a a practice that's dedicated to facial aesthetics only and then obviously the all the income that's coming could be valuable amount. But again, this is something that you should everyone should speak to their accountant about. But back onto am I naughty if? Okay, so, the first the

[39:36] second half of am I naughty if? Okay, so, here's a real one for me. Some years ago, I used to work in the same practice I work now. I used to work there some years ago and at the time I didn't have a parking permit and we struggled. So, I used to and there's parking is a nightmare in Richmond. So, I used to park about a 15-minute walk away and for that privilege I still had to pay probably about 9 or 10 pound a day to park there, okay? Could my parking at that time, I don't think I was, but could could it have been an Am I naughty if I claim my parking as an expense? Yeah, as a sole trader, yes,

[40:08] unfortunately it falls part of your your commute and this is what HMRC look at and say, "Is your ordinary commute, what does that involve?" Be that train, be that driving, be that parking. If that falls within part of your ordinary commute, it won't be allowable. It can be a different circumstance for limited companies. So, there can be some potentially with limited companies on those things because suddenly you're an employer an employee and sometimes parking can fall within the realms of a tax free benefit, but obviously has to meet certain criteria and make the pieces, but for sole trade sole trader associate dentist, yeah, you're you're you're looking at not being able to get

[40:38] that cost. It's one less receipt you have to hold on to. If we take some silver lining out of that, yeah, what less receipt I would allow commuting any cost associated that yeah won't be allowable. Okay, um, am I naughty if I buy my nurse a gift? So, let's say it's it's Christmas time. I'm in a let's say I'm an associate, which I am, but let's say the hypothetical the hypothetical scenario, it's Christmas time, I'm an associate, so I don't employ my nurse, I'm self-employed, but but but my nurse she's awesome and I want to give her a gift and I want this let's say 200 pound

[41:09] gift to be tax deductible. Am I naughty if I expense this 200 pounds as my sole trader account? Yeah, I mean, naughty from a tax perspective, very kind from a personal perspective. So, yeah, unfortunately because you don't employ them it is it is really weird situation where it feels like an employer employee relationship, but actually they're they're technically a supplier. So, supplier falls under supplier entertaining and all the gifts that go with that. And supplier entertaining is pretty much always always disallowable as opposed to employee entertaining which we're operating a business, that's

[41:39] why people can take their staff out for Christmas those and that can be deductible. But as an associate, you're dealing with essentially a supplier that falls into those different rules where it won't be allowable. So, yeah, naughty from tax, very kind otherwise. Okay, we're not doing so well here. Okay, fine. I think I know the answer to this one, but I think you for sure you would have got asked this, so it's worth asking. Am I naughty if I claim my gym membership as a business expense because it helps me stay fit and perform better as a dentist? Yeah, absolutely naughty. And really common question, like you said actually is really really common. It's great to see the dentist caring so

[42:11] much about their health and well-being. Very creative. >> However, yeah, absolutely, but yeah, unfortunately that's a no-no. And the reason for this and people get slightly taken back and it's the same reason for things like physio costs and osteopath and things like this. Ultimately, the reasoning is HMRC say they expect you to look after your physical body regardless of your job. So, even though people would say, "Well, actually I get a bad back from dentistry and all this." Well, the argument is that you would want to have a good back regardless. So, the the business benefit is incidental. So, yeah, it's it's a personal cost and that's the way they see it. Now, we know that we're not naughty if we buy scrubs

[42:42] and we can expense the scrubs, okay? So, that's cool, okay? I don't know if this particular podcast is sponsored by Figs, but occasionally our episodes are sponsored by Figs, so other brands are available. So, we know about scrubs. However, if you want to go to a conference and you want to look the part, so you want to go to a conference, you need a conference suit, right? Am I naughty if I buy a conference suit? Yeah, that's unfortunately so. Really well tested case law with BBC news presenters. They they said, "Oh, I wear a suit to read the news and I don't wear it elsewhere, is that allowable?" And it's no, well, you're you're

[43:13] expected to cover your modesty and how you do that is down to you. So, it's a personal expense. You yeah, you wouldn't you would wear clothes otherwise, so yeah, it doesn't matter what you're wearing. Yeah, unfortunately it's expected. We're not doing so well here. Okay, so this one I This one I really hope Okay, this one I really hope and pray, okay? Am I naughty if I expense that very fancy coffee machine in the break room because it keeps the team caffeinated and happy? Yeah, as a practice owner, absolutely, yes. Wonderful one to hear. Yeah, absolutely. If you're buying buying items for staff to use within there that's wholly

[43:43] exclusive to the trade, keeping staff happy, coffee machine, absolutely you'll be able to claim that. >> a practice principle, right? So, as a practice principle Yeah. Now, let's say Okay, so so we need to The answer there is no, you're not naughty as a practice principle, so go out and buy the best coffee machine for your for your staff guys, all right? So, let's do that. However, now here's here's the curveball now, okay? I love my coffee. Let's say I bought a a machine for me to use at work only. So, it lives at the practice, okay? It's my machine, but it lives at the practice. I I This is the coffee I drink at work. I would say no. Yeah, I would

[44:15] say normal practice and what I would just find the situation what I feel comfortable just find is yeah, if you're leaving it at the practice overnight, there's no personal benefit of that. It's wholly exclusively for work, it's left at the practice overnight. I think that's reasonable and justifiable to HMRC. So, yeah, even for for an associate, keeping that in the surgery, only using it for work, not nipping in on the weekend because they're also in town, which is very unlikely, but yeah, I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Yeah, that's it. Yeah, you're fine in my in my eyes. >> On the topic of coffee, here's an interesting one. Am I naughty if I pop

[44:46] into Costa Coffee on a Saturday and you know what? I want to do some work. I'm going to take out my laptop, I'm going to reply to my patients' emails and I can't freeload there. I'm sat there, let me buy an Americano. That Americano, albeit a small purchase, is that an allowable expense cuz I'm in Costa and I'm doing emails? Yeah, I think if you're genuinely working, it falls into that it's wholly exclusively to the trade and it's fine. And it's I think when we're looking at sort of the best practice and what most people would do in this situation, it's it's about being reasonable. So, if that was every

[45:16] Saturday and it's five coffees, you'd start to say I think HMRC would doubt you're working this much so regularly. If it's the odd one dotted here and there, I think they would look at that and say actually that probably is still legitimately that you've had a a day where you've done some work planning and you happen to have been there and you got a coffee because it's yeah, taking two or three hours longer than expected or something like that. I think that's I think that's what I mean about being reasonable. So, I think provided it meets those conditions we spoke about, it's fine. And if you had a toasty as well on that day? Absolutely. You know, it's the same with courses and conferences and this is

[45:47] where it ties nicely in. Courses and conferences, you know, subsistence for work, if you are genuinely working and you're out and about from your usual workplace, yeah, being able to grab something to eat and something to drink, absolutely fine, meets those conditions. But again, it's about being reasonable and it's about did you need to go to the Ritz every week to to get that toasty? That becomes a bit more lifestyle choice maybe as opposed to dedicated wholly exclusively to work. So, yeah, there's a way I think there's reasons to do those. Excellent. And so, here's an interesting one, okay? So, I know that I can't claim my Netflix as an expense. However, have

[46:17] you heard of this? Okay, so Seb, here's some cool thing that I've I've pioneered and I'm doing in practice, okay? So, imagine you're my patient and I'm going to give you these AR glasses and you're you're wearing these glasses and I I've got a camera on attached to my loops and so I'm doing your examination and then you are seeing the live view of your mouth through the glasses that you're wearing. So, I call this the guided tour oral exam, it's something I pioneered over the last 6-7 months. And this is amazing. Now, on the topic of of those AR glasses, some practices have got those AR glasses and they use

[46:48] them and they live at work and they use them to show allow the patients to watch Netflix. So, it's kind of like having a TV on the ceiling except we don't need a TV on the ceiling anymore, it's like a TV on your face, which is the AR glasses. So, if a practice has a Netflix subscription for patients to watch during long treatments, that should be allowable, I imagine. Yeah, absolutely. I think we could fall back into this coffee machine territory. But I think you what you've created is far more impressive than a coffee machine. So, that's not putting in the same camp there. But no, if if it's been if it's solely for the practice, it's wholly exclusive to the practice, absolutely

[47:18] it's it's part and parcel of that patient experience in the same way Spotify subscriptions to play music in the waiting room, etc. All meet meet that same criteria. It's wholly exclusively for for for the trade, so absolutely that Netflix subscription would be applicable in that situation. But it's obviously yeah, something something I've not come across before in terms of the the it's this sort of virtual reality situation, but yeah, it sounds like yeah, it sounds like it's going to that's going to meet the criteria. So, the final naughty am I naughty if it's a real case scenario. Someone has booked a course conference in Dubai, obviously time of recording all sorts of happening in the world, but

[47:50] it could be anywhere. They've booked a conference in a in a nice hot country and so it's reasonable for the flights to be expensible. It's reasonable for the accommodation to be tax deductible expensible. However, if they've booked another conference in the same city a week afterwards, okay? Now, during the in between period, so for example, if the conference is Saturday and then the Saturday afterwards, in between period is the hotel stay because it's unreasonable for them to come back to the country and then go back. That hotel So, the entire 7 days of hotel, can you claim that or can it only be the night

[48:20] before on either of those conference days? >> Yeah, I think interpreting HMRC's legislation they can be reasonable in situations, but I think the reason that ends at sort of the day before and the day after for travel either side type of thing. I would say if there's a prolonged period in between, a day in between, I think you'd be able to say that's fine. Anything longer than that and you HMRC would take a fairly hard line and say well, then there's there's clearly some personal enjoyment in that interim period. So, they'd probably take probably a slightly dimmer view of that. So, yeah, I think any prolonged periods, you it's quite easy to you would say well,

[48:51] actually that interim period would disallow those nights cuz we can say that those are personal and just those middle nights are fine and keep the nights either side, but accept that yeah, what's in the middle might not get the relief. Okay, that's fair. And so, I want to know, so really interested, what's the most controversial thing a dentist has tried to expense? As there's a a long list. I'm trying to think of the the best one. Probably, and this comes up more than you would think, this isn't just a one-off, this has happened multiple times, a guard dog for their pet Chihuahua

[49:22] at home. They can I put through the vet bills, the food bills because, you know, it's it's a it's a guard dog I'm paying for. And you sort of ask questions, so it's it's the family beloved pet at home and they're trying to put through some some yeah, pretty hefty vet bills and and food, etc. That's probably the most comfortable controversial most unusual one that does get tried from quite a few different angles. And yeah, that comes up more regularly than you would think. Amazing. Well, Seb, thanks for answering all my annoying am I naughty ifs. I think that's been incredibly educational in a in a unusual way which which we which we like on this podcast. So, Seb,

[49:53] look, tell us about how we can learn more from Humphrey and Co. Let lights on and there is no financial interest here. Accountants pitch to come to the podcast all the time. The reason I picked you guys cuz you guys are genuinely my accountants. But that being said, I always allow my guest at the end to to tell us, "Okay, how can we learn more?" If people want interested in your services. Yeah, of course. So, as I said, we usually run seminars, webinars, or features as guests at bits and pieces like this at some of the shows and bits and pieces like that. So, if you ever do see those, please do take an interest. We also do budget updates throughout the

[50:23] year and bits and pieces like that. There'll be e-news that we send out. All important stuff on this is new in dental finance. This is something you should be aware of. And failing that, you know, just reaching out and having a conversation is usually the best best way to start. And we're always happy to give an initial no obligation chats if there's something which you're just concerned about and just want that second opinion. Have a chat, see where that conversation leads. But yeah, ultimately, interacting through our e-news is usually the best port of call and just looking out for us at all the usual places that you'd expect to see dental finance. Yeah, do do do ask questions. That's the bottom line I would always say. You don't know what

[50:54] you don't know if that makes sense. So, ask questions, engage, find out more, and get get that education. I'll put the Humphrey and Co. um website and details in the show notes so everyone can check that out. Here's an interesting question I forgot to ask, but this is actually really interesting. Is in this world that there's this perception that we see online that associates have it easy and like they don't have to deal with the staffing and that kind of stuff. And then associates are saying, "Actually, principals have it sweet, you know, they get a whole a big percentage of our pay and they go on more holidays." Whatever this

[51:24] perception that they have actually is both ways. Associates think principals go on more holidays. Principals think associates have it easy and they're always gallivanting on holidays. And so, it's it's a very interesting thing. Now, as someone who looks at the numbers on either of them, who would you Who would you rather be? The the the associate or the the principal? So, essentially, the question I'm trying to ask in a roundabout way is with the additional risk with the additional headache that the principal takes on, do you the numbers in terms of earning power and income that you see, do you think they're they're justifiable? I I would

[51:55] say the honest answer is they are very different situations now. And this is a really bizarre thing to say because you the numbers on paper can show one thing. So, generally speaking, if you look at averages, yeah, the average principal per practice earns more than the average associate. And as you said, with all the risk that comes with that, they're probably still doing clinical work for varying degrees. But yeah, on paper, that's the situation. From a cash perspective, it can be very very different. If you bought a practice and you've taken out large bank finance, a lot of your income on paper is going to repay the capital of that large loan

[52:27] that you took out at the start. So, from a cash flow perspective, sometimes and what I sort of try and gear people buying their first practice up for is you might be more cash rich as an associate for a period of time, but as a principal, you're building a savings account. The practice is a bit of a savings account that when you come to sell that, you're then going to realize I mean, you've paid off the loan and are realizing a large sum on a large asset and and that's going to be a large injection into your life. But it is down the line. So, principals on paper do earn more. Cash wise, they might not be

[52:58] as well off as associates probably think. Um and likewise, associates might be richer month to month, but in the long term, they're going to have to rely a lot more on putting money in pensions cuz they're not going to have, you know, potentially a seven-figure sum they might be selling in in 10, 15 years' time. So, whether which one which one is worth the trade-off, impossible to answer. Stability is is key in a lot of places and dealing with staff isn't always the funnest thing in the world. But yeah, they're they're they're very different. I think there's a probably that lack of understanding probably from from both sides of actually what goes on into these things and how that affects cash

[53:29] on paper, not just earnings. Glad I asked that. That was a really interesting answer, actually. Brilliant. Seb, thanks so much for your time and thank you for all you do at Humphrey and Co. for for us all. Thank you. No, thank you very much Ash for inviting me. Thank you. Well, there we have it, guys. Thank you for listening to me and Seb Stacey all the way to the end. Hope that had some funny elements in there. Hope that had some surprising, "Ooh, I can claim this." You know, those kind of moments are really important and we had a a lot of those moments in February this year where it was personal finances month. Every month we have a theme on the podcast and February this year was all about personal finances and career

[53:59] security. So, please, another reason to join the app is that you can retrospectively go back and check out all of the content we posted [music] that month. Don't forget to check out that webinar I told you as part of the Protrusive Dental Pearl and hopefully you'll even be able to catch the part two live. Scroll down, answer the questions, and if you get 80% we'll email you a CPD CE certificate. We are a PACE approved education provider. Wherever you're listening, hit that subscribe, hit that like, send us some love, and of course, please send this to someone that you like and you want them to discover Protrusive as well. That would actually mean a lot to us. I want to thank team Protrusive who works so

[54:30] hard behind the scenes bringing these together and moderating Protrusive Guidance. I'll catch you on there. I'll see you same time, same place next week. Bye for now. >> [music]
