# Before the Breaking Point - Mental Health and Suicide Prevention in Dentistry - IC071
videoId: BftumzpytJI
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BftumzpytJI
duration: 44:22
publishedDate: 2026-04-14
publishedTimeText: 4 days ago

[0:00] You know, what? I think the associate next door is struggling a bit. How can we help them in a non-judgmental way when we identify these colleagues and we ask the tough questions or where can we ensure that the word gets out enough of the right resources? How can we suggest the right resources for dentists not only at crisis point but [music] actually prevention? What are some patterns that we can look out for to then be able to give targeted help and advice? How do we begin to tackle this high-level problem? What is the next step for places of work to instill this

[0:32] culture which will help [music] be compassionate? >> Dentistry is a toxic place. I know that your some listeners may find that difficult to understand. I have found it difficult to understand, but there is a toxic culture. [music] The reality is that every suicide is complex. It is a multifaceted, multifactorial um event. Protrusive Rati, every year or so I release an episode. An episode that can really send chills. An episode that [music] can potentially save a life. And this could be a life of a colleague or

[1:02] even your own. And something we just cannot, we must not ignore in dentistry. [music] I'm just going to go ahead and say it. Dentistry has a suicide problem. We knew [music] that. You knew that when you entered dental school. You knew that when you left dental school. It wasn't just a random myth. [music] It's backed by data. And one of the missions of what we do here at Protrusive is not only to make you fall in love with dentistry again and to help you improve clinically and non-clinically, [music] but we also have a duty to shine a light on the not-so-nice stuff in [music] dentistry. And that is the stress, the pressure,

[1:33] and the burnout. And it's these three things, my friends, stress, pressure, and burnout that make the theme for this month. Since the start of 2026, [music] we've started doing monthly themes where at least two of the episodes in that month will be dedicated just [music] to that one theme. And so today I present you an extremely powerful guest with a very crushing story. It's actually really tragic, but what he's doing, he's using this tragedy to fuel suicide prevention [music] and mental health aid for dentists. I have for us today Professor John Gibson,

[2:04] emeritus professor of oral medicine. He's extremely humble. I did not know when we were recording he's so distinguished. And I love that. I love humility [music] in people like that. He's allowed me to call him John. And John has a very sad story whereby his son called Cameron committed [music] suicide. Now, as a father, I can only imagine what kind of a loss this is for someone and the emotional turmoil surrounding this. This is what eventually led him to open the Canmore Trust. Canmore is an anagram of his son Cameron. And as the name suggests, we [music] can do more.

[2:36] We can all do more to help prevent suicides. The Canmore Trust is a suicide prevention and mental health charity. [music] Now, the General Dental Council in 2021 welcomed the launch of the Mental Health Wellness in Dentistry Framework. And this is what they had to say. Conversations about mental health should be encouraged. [music] Dental professionals should feel able to share their experiences and think about the steps that can be taken to improve and safeguard mental health wellness. Indirectly, in your practices, you may have come to know about this. Perhaps your practice has already adopted

[3:06] [music] this framework, for example, by identifying a mental health wellness lead. And another part of this initiative is stress awareness training. All members of the dental team should undertake stress [music] awareness training. So, this episode is eligible for CE and CPD and this forms as part of your training. And guys, forget [music] the certificates, right? This is real-world stuff. You could save a life. At the very least, you can reduce your stress or identify signs of distress in your colleagues. [music] We openly discuss about the toxic culture in dentistry. It's not everywhere in dentistry, but I'm sure we can all

[3:38] identify that it exists. And one of the things we can do to counteract that is openly talk about our mental health. And that's what this episode is about, my friends. I'm not going to lie. If you've been affected by these themes of suicide and maybe you've had a a colleague who's gone through this, then this will make for some tough listening. And it's never nice to talk about these things, but is it important? Of course it is. It's really, really key. And I really want everyone to to listen [music] and watch this episode just as much as you enjoy our resin veneer episodes or our onlay episodes or our geeky occlusion ones. We owe it to ourselves and our colleagues to listen to episodes

[4:10] like these so we can better look after our mental health and that of our colleagues. Let's now join the main episode and I'll catch you in the outro. John Gibson, welcome to the Protrusive Dental Podcast. You have such an important mission today and I thank you so much for making time to be here. John, can you please tell us about yourself and about the Canmore Trust and how it all came to be? Well, thanks Jazz and thanks for the invitation to be with you today and it's a great opportunity to to speak to my fellow dental professionals cuz that's what I am. I'm I'm still a registered dental surgeon.

[4:41] Um I was historically a clinical academic. I taught dentistry for 35 years and loved every second of it. Was eventually the uh the dean of a dental school. And then things uh didn't go so well for the Gibson family. So, we have three fantastic children, Malcolm, Eilidh, and Cameron. And at the tail end of 2019, so just before COVID kicked in, our youngest child, our youngest son, Cameron, who was 24 years old, he took his own life. He died by suicide. He was a young veterinary surgeon. We didn't know then that the

[5:12] veterinary suicide rate is about three to four times the national average. We now know that and we now know that other professional groups are at increased risk of suicidal behavior, too. And and so we'll talk about that just shortly. But the result of that was on the devastation that we faced and I had my own suicidal crisis eight months after Cameron died. We realized that there was a real dearth of um practical support for people who were in mental health crisis or indeed in suicidal crisis or had come through being impacted by suicide, so they'd lost someone uh to suicide. And so we

[5:44] set up the Canmore Trust and uh in fact we're just coming up to our fourth birthday at January 20 uh 2022. Kicked off as a registered charity. And it might not be completely obvious to your viewers and listeners, but Canmore is an anagram of Cameron. Uh so Cameron is our son who died. But there's also this sense in that that we can do more. And then indeed we must do more in suicide prevention and well-being, not least of all within the dental profession. I I appreciate you sharing that with us and appreciate for the

[6:15] adversity and the sheer emotion and the trauma that you went through and how you repurposed that into a mission to help others. I think that's really important. I I thank you so much for for doing that. Um you shared something an insight into the veterinary world of which I had read about previously as well about how in their profession these things happen. But in dentistry, when I was coming into dentistry, it was like one of those things they said that oh yeah, they have one of the highest suicide rates. And in the last few years, unfortunately, we have lost good people in dentistry to to

[6:47] suicide. Uh unfortunately, it And um I don't know if you have any stats on this or what is the scale of the problem in dentistry cuz I can think of at least two people in the last two years. And these are like really well-known people. They these these were speakers and and like most of the profession knew them. One in Europe in implantology, one on home turf. I'm sure you know who I'm talking about. And it was just devastating, you know? It's just definitely devastating. And so what Do you know the scale of the of the problem? So, it's very difficult um to actually

[7:19] estimate the scale. Um the General Dental Council have taken a baby step towards helping us with this, but they've got so much more to do. So, we know that um at the tail end of 2024, the GDC issued a three-year window period um of those who had died during fitness to practice processes. So, those were individuals under investigation by the GDC. And so those figures were published. And the GDC didn't take the final step of saying, "And here are the numbers that were suicides and here's

[7:51] here are the numbers that were myocardial infarctions or here are the numbers that were cancer or whatever." And so we've yet to do that. And I have a genuine challenge to to the regulator to do that. I think there is an obligation to do that. The General Medical Council do that without hesitation. And I think that the GDC should also do that. Now, that's just a little subset of what's happening in the rest of the profession, but it would give us some understanding as to the impact and the stresses that are upon

[8:24] the dental professional, the whole the whole dental team at the moment. It's not just dentists. It's DCPs and there's others part of the dental team. And so we've got a journey to go yet, but I think we need to do that. The objection is that when we do that, because our profession is relatively small, that that numbers become identifiable people. And my argument to that is that no one dies in dentistry by suicide without the profession knowing about it. It becomes common knowledge very quickly. So, there's no breach of confidentiality or

[8:55] anything. And and I think we need to do that process. So, the challenge is with the GDC to do that. I don't know whether they'll pick the challenge up to do that, but I would like to take that to do that forward. But credit to them. They have taken this baby step of at least publishing early data on deaths while undergoing fitness to practice processes. With insight that you have in you know, after the the tragic loss and then you then found out the the the situation in in the veterinary

[9:25] veterinary world and we know about the the situation in the dentistry world. Specifically dentistry, why is it that okay, if if the very much the the apex of the the breaking point is um suicide, but that's like the tip of the iceberg. So many maybe I believe there was a BDA survey that that significantly high percentage, you may know the figures, unfortunately thought about taking their own life. And then the And this was I think anonymously they surveyed the dentists and a shockingly high percentage had

[9:55] said this. So, why do you think we are where we are? It's a great question and it's a really difficult question. So, so don't expect any trite or simple answers from me because we're now entering a world of utter complexity. And if I've learned anything about suicides and since Cameron died, it is that it is a complex thing. And when we're talking with clients about this, we often talk about pieces of a jigsaw going in on a board because when we deal with clients who have lost a suicide, often the immediate

[10:26] result is it happened because of X. It happened because of Y or there was a row at work, there was a falling out at work, there was a financial inspiration, there was something. But the reality is that every suicide is complex. It is a multifaceted, multifactorial um event. And we find it reassuring when we speak to clients about this because they will often be holding the thing, "If I'd only done this or if I hadn't done that." Um but the reality is it's a complex thing. And so we just

[10:57] need to understand that and and take that forward. Having said that, within dentistry, there are clearly um a number of issues at work and a number of papers recently published have have um really helped us understand this. So, the first one I think is toxicity within dentistry. Um dentistry is a toxic place. I know that viewers and listeners may find that difficult to understand. I have found it difficult to understand, but there is a toxic culture and there's a toxic culture around harassment, particularly around sexual harassment um

[11:28] within the the dental profession. And and recent publications have demonstrated that quite clearly. And it happens within dental schools, it happens uh within vocational training, and it carries on through. So, there is a toxic culture. And when you look at the figures of those who have been sexually harassed, um we meet those individuals through the Canmore Trust. So, those individuals might reach suicidal crisis because they're working with an individual who just continually touches them or says things to them that

[11:59] are just undermining their And so, there is a toxic culture. And I also think within dentistry at the moment, there is a toxic culture around achievement. So, people never share on social media as far as I'm concerned the things that went wrong or went badly. They always share the things that they think have gone particularly well. And there's a real competitive environment in dentistry nowadays because of that. But for the ordinary practitioner just going about their business, that can feel very difficult and very isolating. I don't do

[12:30] social media, while they're all doing social media, I don't do social media. So, that can also lead to a place of significant isolation. I'm just doing my job. I just go to my work and do my job. How do I not have time to have all this stuff going on as well? Why am I not building the palaces that um appear on on on social media? So, there's the toxic culture, there is this whole issue of kind of feeling isolated and alone as people seem to climb the ladder of success and I don't feel particularly successful. And then there's a really important part of this and and that is

[13:01] all of the aspects that makes dentistry quite difficult. I'm doubly qualified in medicine and dentistry and I can tell you that dentistry was by far and away the harder course. And it's actually the harder profession and and and I'm going to be get all kinds of pelters on social media now for saying that, but it's true because not only is there the intellectual challenge of what you're learning in dentistry, but there is the real practical skill challenge. And and in a very short period of time, you have to really step up. And I think many people realize that they're not quite stepping up, that um they're in a job

[13:32] which is almost explicitly practical and yet they're struggling a little bit and they're aware that they've committed to this course, they've committed to this profession and they know inside that they're going to be not the best dentist that that's ever going to walk the face of the earth. And so, they take that struggle into their into their lifelong professional work. And that is a genuine struggle and that comes out in conversation a lot with people and that we need to struggling with with well-being and taking things forward. But there's another aspect to this as well and I think I'm increasingly aware of the stigma of mental ill health

[14:04] within dentistry. And despite being a welfare, well-being profession, we don't actually look after ourselves and look after our our fellow co-workers very well either. And there remains within dentistry, and it's the same in medicine, the stigma about mental ill health. We can't demonstrate this apparent so-called weakness. And despite the fact we're all biologically chained, we all understand that your ingrown toenail is a biological process, your myocardial infarction is a biological process, mental ill health is a

[14:36] biological process as well. And yet we separate it off to be something with stigma, something different, so we can't talk about it. I I can't go into work and tell my boss that I've been diagnosed with depression. I can't tell my partner that I've started going to Alcoholics Anonymous. I can't tell my partner that I've started antidepressants. These are all challenges that people face and I wonder why that is because we wouldn't hesitate to go in and say to our boss or our partner, "I've been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and I've got 9 months

[15:07] to live." So, so why do we not bring that transparency around mental ill health and well-being in into our workplace? And it's a very genuine challenge. And then there's another bit to this um that is the issue of neurodiversity. And if figures are currently correct, we're looking at somewhere around 26% of the UK population that will be neurodiverse by by 2030. Um and that's probably it may even be a conservative estimate. That has impacts for the educational process,

[15:38] it has impacts for dental school, and it certainly has impacts for for dentistry, how we train dentists, but how neurodivergent people, whether they're diagnosed or not, deal with the profession and how they get on with their professional life. And here's a really important point. If you're undiagnosed and you're neurodivergent and therefore unsupported, you've got a difficult journey ahead. Um and the figures are emerging for increased rates of suicide amongst neurodivergent people. And for those who

[16:08] are um undiagnosed and unsupported, there are a number of papers together that have estimated that the suicide rate in those individuals is eight times the national average. So, all of that's in there, but we forget one other thing here and that is that dentists and DCPs are just ordinary people as well. They turn up on a Monday morning and they get on with their professional stuff and all this stuff that's hitting them um that was just talked about, but they're also ordinary people. And they've got marriage difficulties and they've got cancer diagnoses and they've got kids that are struggling at school

[16:38] and they've got all of that stuff going on and a failure in a mortgage payment, all of that stuff's happening. And then here we are, the erudite professional, we step in through the practice or through the clinic on a Monday morning and the smile goes on and we have to carry all of that stuff because we couldn't possibly let it out, could we? Could we? Because, my goodness, what then happens if we let it all out? Well, here's the challenge. What does happen if you let it all out? What happens if you take your partner in the practice aside and say, "John, Jane, Mary, Tom,

[17:09] I'm really struggling just now and I'm going to have to take 2 to 3 weeks off until I get um things sorted out." You can't do that. You know, you've got patients booked, you've got treatment protocols going forward. We have to do that. It's our professional and personal responsibility to say, "I am not doing well at the moment. I need to step back. I need to self-care just now and then I will be back and I'll be much better when I come back, but I just can't do this just now." And that has to happen more. That was such a succinct summary

[17:39] and two particular insights which I hadn't come across before. I thank you I mean I thank you so much for sharing all of that. It was such a really relatable summary. I think we can all relate to it, but I did not know about the scale of the sexual harassment. Thank you so much for sharing that. I I honestly I was completely oblivious to that. So, thank you for sharing that. And also about the neurodivergence um bit being a a potentially a hidden issue that that definitely needs exploring further. And and that insight about medicine and dentistry is very useful. Yes, please. And I'm just going to say

[18:10] that one of the classical features of certain aspects of neurodivergence is perfectionism. And perfectionism is one of the major traits of suicidal thinking. And there are a number of traits that move towards suicidal thinking, but there are two that are particularly pertinent to dentistry. And one is the perfectionist trait. And but there's another one which figures frequently in those who think about suicide. And that's breaking our moral code. And we can cope with breaking your

[18:42] moral code um if it happens infrequently. But if you're working in an environment where you want to work at this level, but the workplace is causing you to work at this level, then you cannot be in that environment without it having significant impact on your mental well-being. And this whole issue of breaking one's moral code is increasingly for me as I work with dental professionals and other professionals, something that comes up very frequently in that discussion around suicidal thinking. I just can't

[19:12] be here anymore because I'm like an alien life form because I want to work at this level and being forced to work at this level. And that's a really difficult thing to deal with. It's a very interesting level of um it's like this cognitive dissonance. It's it's it's like um my mind was really ticking as you were saying that. It's very relatable because it's a bit like uh and sorry to take it to clinical dentistry, but I just want to make it give you a relatable example, right? One of my endodontic mentors once told me that the

[19:43] the more endodontics you learn, the more courses that you go on, and when you finally gain and acquire the skills of where to find the MB2 and then how to actually navigate the MB2, okay? And And once you learn it, you can't then unlearn it. So, now you know, so when next time you go in and you only got 15 minutes to do uh finish off this root canal, and you know that MB2 is there, but you are because of time, or because of an issue, because of so many other factors, you are choosing to be blind to that MB2, finish off the treatment. That is a level of cognitive dissonance that

[20:14] can raise your cortisol, cuz again, you are breaking that moral code. So, once you develop and and you you increase your standards, and then due to a system, due to a environment, or due to which nurse you're working with that day that you're unable to work to that level, and you're having to take a shortcut which you know is taking a shortcut, that can really eat at you. Yeah. No, indeed. Completely. You got it. I want to ask about In terms of the purpose of this episode is really like threefold, I think. One is how to just to learn more about the the scale of the

[20:46] problem, which How to identify people who we can help, because at any point in time, there are colleagues that we know right now, which may not be the whole clinical and subclinical the tip of the iceberg is it's just below it. How can we figure out, okay, you know what, I think um the associate next door is struggling a bit. How can we help them in a non-judgmental way? That's one thing I want to talk about. And then um how to also talk about um the way that the Canwell Trust can be supported, and also how the Canwell Trust can support

[21:17] others, and also the other resources that are out there. Because the more we can talk about these resources that are there for prevention, but also um at crisis points, ideally we want to prevent people from getting to crisis point, but there are many who are at crisis point that need urgent help. How can we get them that help? So, let's start with what are some patterns that we can look out for to to to then be able to give targeted help and advice. How do we begin to to tackle this high-level problem? Yeah. So, that's a great question, and Hello, YouTube

[21:47] protrusarati. I know you're watching on YouTube, and I hope you enjoyed this episode so far. But, I wanted to highlight, in case you don't know yet, we have an amazing viewing experience on protrusive.app, our website, our network, our platform. So, I just want to spend a minute to show you what this looks like. On the left side, you see the navigation, and when you join the app, you get a 1-minute video tour of the entire network. Now, in terms of where the magic happens, that's in the protrusive community, cuz you might come for the content, but you'll stay for the community of the nicest and geekiest

[22:18] dentists in the world. We have all these polls, we have a chat group, there's always active chats and dentists helping dentists. And really what I want to do is create a really supportive environment that's not like the environment we have on Facebook, and it's built on the values of niceness and geekiness. If you are nice and geeky, you belong here. Now, to make this a safe space, we have a manual process of approval. We actually verify that you are a dental professional before you get in here. So, we have hundreds of applicants a day. So, if it's been about

[22:48] 2 days and you haven't heard anything, either something's in your junk, or you need to reach out. If you're still waiting to join your tribe, email Marie at protrusive.co.uk. That's m a r i at protrusive.co.uk, and she'll investigate what's happened. Now, all the videos you have on YouTube are also on here, but you actually have some extra ones for free that you don't have on YouTube. So, you get some bonus content that's not on YouTube. And actually, for the future, I'm not taking things out of YouTube, but some things are not appropriate for the wider public, and I want to sort of safeguard that information, which is

[23:19] like dentist talk, if you like. So, that's why a lot of the content is only here and not on YouTube. So, you're kind of missing out if you're not on here. That's why I'd love for you to join there. And if you join one of our paid plans, then what you get is access to the CE quiz, like this one, and you can get CPD or CE certificates. And also, you get our premium notes. So, these are a great aid-memoire or revision for an episode to really cement your learning. And whilst we have ads and YouTube places ads on YouTube, we don't have that on our network. So, for the paid plan, you get to see all of the premium notes without any of the ads. And of

[23:51] course, you get to support Team Protrusive and help us to continue what we're doing. I'm just going to gloss over the protrusive vault, which has all our infographics and downloadables. These are all our masterclasses at this moment in time, and we're always planning to add more. And if you look at it, there's about 1 2 3, there's about seven of them, but actually, if you look at the replay section, some of the live masterclasses that I've done and some of the training that people pay for on other websites is all on there, included as part of the masterclass subscription. And if you're a student, don't fear, we have a special section for you with all the student notes, which anyone can

[24:21] access. So, for example, here is one on exodontia. So, it's all there waiting for you on protrusive guidance. Please head over to the website, which is protrusive.app, make an account on your browser. This could be Safari, Chrome, however you want to do it. And once you've made your login, then you can download the iOS or Android app, and then log in through there. So, the reason to make the subscription primarily on the website first is that you get access to a free trial, which you don't get if you do make an account on Android iOS. If you make it on the website, you get access to a free trial, and you get our best

[24:52] price if you sign up through protrusive.app. So, our best deals and free trials are only on protrusive.app. Of course, we always put the link below in the description, and thank you so much for enjoying our videos on YouTube, but it's now finally time to level up your experience. Back to the episode. But, it's the pivotal question, because we need to be able to see in our colleagues, in our family, when things are changing. And I guess there are three things that come out as things that we see repeatedly or being reported to us. And the first one of those is change in temperament. So, Mr. Easy

[25:24] Going becomes Mr. Angry. So, shouting at staff, shouting at colleagues, shouting at patients. So, a change in temperament is actually a major issue. Second is withdrawal, um and that withdrawal can be in a professional sense. So, I used to sit in the staff area at lunchtime and have my sandwiches, um and I don't do that anymore. So, why has John withdrawn in that way? And then the third thing is social withdrawal as well. Why is John not going to the Christmas night out? Um why is John John doesn't

[25:56] come anymore. John used to go with his wife and his family to social functions at the weekend, and he would always come in and tell us about them. He clearly has changed, and something has happened. So, these are the three things that I would suggest to you um pointing to something not not quite right going on here. Um and then and then two words in combination. One is empathy, and the other is boldness. So, we need to be bold um in being able to reach out to an

[26:27] individual and say, we need to talk. Not from a place of judgment, but from a place of empathic desire to help you. Okay? So, we'll go on for a walk at lunchtime and so we'll chat with you, or um are you free one night this week? Let's go for a coffee and a chat. Let's just chew the fat together and see where we're at. And then, we need to do a bit of fact-finding. How are things? Are you struggling a bit? Tell me about it. Um and and this is a confidential space, so this isn't going anywhere else. This

[26:57] isn't going to anybody else in the practice or in the clinic. Just share with me what's going on if you can. Um I'm keen to hear from you. And then, the boldness then transmogrifies to a different level, um because you then need to ask a question. And that question is simply this, are you thinking about taking your life? And yeah, the silence for a moment, even as I share that question with you. But, we need to know a number of things about that question. And the first thing is that by asking that question, you will

[27:28] never precipitate suicidal behavior. Never. And you may indeed bring someone back from suicidal crisis. Okay? So, the boldness needs to be doubly reinforced. We need to ask that question. Okay? But, the difficulty is that because we're healthcare practitioners, we always want to to just couch it with a little bit of positivity. So, instead of asking the boldness of that question, we always do something like this. You're not thinking of doing something silly, are you? And immediately, we've brought judgment into the room. So, this individual sitting with us, they may

[28:00] have had their dog put to sleep, um and that has been the final thing for them, because there's a whole lot of other stuff going on upstream. And we think, your dog's just been put down. I love dogs, too, but really, suicide? So, you must not bring judgment into the room. And that's why in training, we say, you need to ask one question. Don't think about other questions, one question. And the one question is, are you thinking about taking your life? Okay? Now, and here's a really important further point to this, and it's this is the pivotal one. So, every healthcare professional

[28:30] that I have ever asked that question to has said, "Oh, John, don't be daft. Don't be silly. Yes, things are bad at the moment, but let's go and have a glass of chilled Merlot or a beer. It'll be fine in the morning." Okay? Never take that Never take that response from a fellow healthcare professional. And in the Canwell Trust, we call it the double bounce. So, you bounce the ball once, and you ask the question, are you thinking about taking your life? And you get the response back, "Don't be daft. Don't be silly." And you bounce the ball again, and you ask it again, "No, this is really important to me. I can see

[29:02] that you're struggling. Are you thinking about taking your life?" And the response of, "Yes, I am. I need help." on that second bounce is profoundly greater than the first bounce. So, if if you don't take anything else away from this discussion today, please remember a small bald man sitting in front of you in a podcast. Can't remember his name, but he talked about a double bounce. Okay? You bounce the ball once, you ask the question without embellishment, are you thinking about taking your life? And the answer is, "Oh, la la la."

[29:32] You bounce it again, "No, I'm going to ask you again. This is really important. I think so badly you're thinking of taking your life." And then, of course, if the answer is yes, we have to do something. And one of the mistakes that we make is So, John, I'm just going to just I'll you here and and say, firstly, thank you for sharing this really important question and I think we need to instill a level of courage and boldness in our colleagues to be able to ask such a question. Now, I have had some training on this topic before because I treat patients in chronic pain and I have asked this question to my

[30:03] patients because I've been trained in this way and I I know well from my training that what the follow-up question is if they say yes, how deep should we go cuz I I I think this is all very good stuff because this is this can help dentists with their with their patients as well in in terms of suicide prevention in in in everyone in a family member. Should we go through the protocol in terms of okay, when they say yes, what the follow-up question should be because I think this is very valuable information but if you feel as though this is something that everyone should do in their own time, how would you like to approach I think we've done the

[30:34] emergency work here. I think that's what people need to to know and understand. All I was going to say with regard to the next step is if someone says yes, um I'm suicidal, then your obligation is to either take them to a place of safety, so that's an an emergency department to a local hospital or is to dial 999. Well, those are the only two options and that's what I wanted to say on that because people say well, I'd phone the GP or I'd do this or do that. Those are the two options. You get them to a place of safety or >> Thank you so much. So, one thing that um I was trained and this was very much in terms of for my patients. I mean, it's a

[31:06] very dark conversation but it's very important and we have a responsibility as healthcare professionals to to to to ask the right questions at the right time and so with my patients I was taught to to the next one of the next questions would be if they say yes, you have to stay very calm and say, have you thought about how you would do it? Because that then tells you about how how serious if someone's already thought about how they would do it, this is another level of escalation. Now, I think what you said is a perfect advice for anyone listening because if they say yes, then it gives us a clear action

[31:38] without having to feel like to be the the therapist or the person to to take this on by themselves. I feel as though we should at that point, okay, let's now get some help rather than take it on yourself. I've only done this additional training because I was alone I'm alone with the patients in that room and I feel as though I wanted to give myself a little bit more but I think what you're saying and at the the level we're pitching at here is is perfect but any any thoughts on whether you feel as though people colleagues listening to this episode right now with you, I think that's great and I don't think we need

[32:08] to teach them the other bits. I think if you get a yes, well, firstly the double bounce is is just a really important distinction. Really really important that you mentioned that the double bounce and ask again and if you get a yes, take them to safety or dial 999 is just something very pragmatic and something easy to remember for everyone. Yep and I don't want to give you more complex than that because you can make it hugely complex and then you take the burden on you and and the burden is not with you. All you're doing is helping this individual get to a place of safety

[32:39] and believe me if you do this and I've done it many times now, um the joy of saving a life is a remarkable thing and those individuals will come back in due course and say, "Jazz, thanks so much for what you did. John, thanks so much for what you did. You saved our life." Thank you so much. I think that is the biggest takeaway and I just want to wrap up if you like and and find out okay, so when we identify these colleagues and we've asked the tough questions or where can we ensure that

[33:09] the word gets out enough of the right resources? How can we suggest the right resources for dentists not only at crisis point but actually prevention? And people who are approaching a crisis, what resources are there? So, for example, how does the Canmore Trust operate? How do you help dentists to prevent getting to that point? What other resources are available to those listening who are feeling really burnt out and stressed? What is the next thing we should do? >> So, my strong advice is that you visit the Canmore Trust website, so the

[33:40] canmoretrust.co.uk. We have been applauded for our resources on our website and there are a whole list of things there and it's not just about suicide, it's about well-being, it's about when you feel burnt out and when you feel a mental health crisis and how you might find help, how how you might get help and so I just encourage people to take a look at that but the second aspect to this is a very personal one and and that is that we must learn to share with other people that are

[34:11] struggling and it's such an important message um because of the stigmatization of mental health and because of all of that stuff that is so prevalent still, it's got so much work to do in that. We need to take again a bold step I guess of speaking to our partners or our wives or our husbands and and saying, "This is where I'm at and and I I I need help. Please can you help me because when someone is in a mental health crisis or struggling with depression or anxiety

[34:41] and I know that from personal experience, it's very difficult to go to our website and say, "La la la. Oh, that looks good. We'll have a shot at that." It's so much more helpful when you get someone sitting next to you to say, "I think that might be good. What do you think?" "Well, let's take a look at that. Let's dig into that and see what what others might be." So, really important and then the third step in all of this is the general practitioner. So, we've moved from the crisis moment uh and now we need to involve the general medical practitioner in this and you need to go and have a professional to

[35:12] professional discussion and say, you might know me from wherever the walking up the aisle with my dogs or the golf club or whatever it might be cuz professional people know each other, don't they? But it's time to go and have that discussion and say, "I'm really struggling and I'm really burnt out and and I need help at this this Last day and yesterday I was speaking to one of the dentists and other healthcare professional who had done exactly that and was astonished that how compassionate and kind her GP was and just opened doors for them to get and

[35:43] immediate and transformative help. And because we talk about waiting times all the time, we talk about this, we talk about how bits of the health service are broken but we need to look after each other. If we can't look after each other, we're not looking after patients very well. So, we need to learn to look after each other pretty well. I guess not the final step but a further step in this process is the GP is pivotal in all of this and you need to go and just have a chat with the GP and say, "Here's where I'm at. Please can you help?" >> John, my my final final question if I may, I've just had another really important question is what advice can

[36:14] you give to workplaces? Be they corporate or be they a mom-and-pop run family practice who have associates or team members or just how can we create the right workplace culture that you know how we have like you know, practices nowadays they have social media policies, they have policies for for this, that and the other and I don't know if there is a suicide prevention policy. I don't I I don't know how that works or how it's worded, a mental health policy. So, I actually don't remember reading one unless I squiggled on something and I just bypassed it but

[36:45] that is obviously the obvious way, policies in place but how can you create the right framework? And I just want to just give you an example, right? I just want to shout out to my previous place of work, the Triangle Dental used to work in Reading. I've now moved to to West London, Richmond but they they really created a safe environment. My practice manager Dee was was lovely and anytime where I was really feeling burnt out and anxious, I was able to just step in, have a meeting and just let it all out and they were able to change my hours to to to suit it or change my days to help me and I that really helped me

[37:16] in my career in the last four, five years. That really helped me a lot when I was feeling down and I really wish for everyone to have this relationship with their place of work where they can have that kind of conversation and so I just want to shout out and say thank you to my previous place of work for for allowing that environment and I wish that for everyone. So, my question to you John is how what is what is the next step for places of work to instill this culture which will help be compassionate? >> Okay, so step one, the boss needs to go on a mental health first aid training course because that will allow you to understand what it is to have mental ill

[37:48] health because we talk about mental health and mental ill health as if they're the same thing. We need to understand what mental ill health looks like and and so going on a course for mental health first aid, great opportunity to learn how to look after staff, how to really care for them and then implement that into I guess what I would then call a good induction program so that when every member of staff starts you talk about not just the computer system and where the car parking is but you also talk about we care about mental health in this practice and it's a priority for us and

[38:21] so if you're feeling or struggling, here is the accountability officer. So, appoint an accountability officer. So, someone who looks after the mental health and well-being of all staff and that's a really important part of of Next up, provision of reflective spaces and do not have meetings at lunchtime. Don't have staff meetings at lunchtime. Don't have any meetings at lunchtime. You walk around the block at lunchtime. So, in a previous place of work when I was the boss, I banned all lunchtime meetings unless you walked and talked at

[38:53] the same time. Okay? So, lunchtimes are for people to relax. Lunchtimes are for people to sit and chat and be human beings together and share life together. So, no meetings at lunchtime but encouraging people to exercise if they want to do that but we can also build that into a discussion of accountability partners in the practice too. Building that out there, provision of reflective spaces really important. So, I know that rooms are often tight, spaces often tight in practices but a place that people can go to unashamedly,

[39:25] unabashedly and say, "I've had a rubbish morning. I'm just going to go and sit in the the reflective space just for 10 minutes just to to regain my balance and regain my thoughts." Fantastic. There can be books in there. There can be books on My daughter just gave me a brilliant book which is how to laugh for 365 days of the year. And so, every day you open up a page and there's a just a lovely little thing to read that makes you smile, which is great. Next thing, which is good to do is in the midst of tough times in dentistry, when people are often saying things are so bad and

[39:56] things are just bad bad bad bad, each member of staff each day shares three good things that have happened during the course of the day. So, as you're preparing to leave for the the day, just remember, share with me three good things that have happened today. Well, this is Smith one of the new dentists. Fantastic. Yeah, the kind of things that would happen in a dental practice to make you smile. So, instead of taking home the negativity of the day, you take home the positivity of the day. Um and that's so significant. You'll have done mental health first aid training. I want

[40:27] someone in the practice to do assist training, ASIST. ASIST training is the exemplar suicide prevention training. It's a two-day course. It's the best you can do. Get someone in the practice booked in so that can feed back into the the protocol for mental well-being within the practice, but it would also allow people to to talk very openly about their mental well-being and and any thoughts of suicidal behavior or any anything around that. So, that's very important as well. And then, I guess

[40:58] mental health services. So, does the practice have a have a policy? Would they not only engage with NHS at services, but would the practice be willing to engage in private health care to provide the best level of the absolute level of support and for an individual in the practice if they require that. So, those are all the things I would wrap up into how does a practice develop well-being? That was such a brilliant, comprehensive, and and and pragmatic and practical answer. Even just my mind was wondering towards the the reflective zone. Like if in a

[41:29] practice where I work in West London, you know, space is very tight, but even just I was thinking, having one chair dedicated to, you know what, that chair is the meditation chair or the mindfulness chair or something like that. You know, it can even be like, you know, that one specific chair. If you're sitting there, you know, you can be in your zone and whatever and and and and having those books is really um a great insight and idea. Thank you so much for sharing these wonderful guidelines. I I think this is going to be giving everyone, whether a practice principal and they want to help to create a captivate a culture that that

[42:01] is good compassion focus and and helping their team to prevent to even get to burn out. You gave some wonderful tips there. And of course, it gave all the colleagues out there who maybe have recognized those signs of, you know, change in temperament and social withdrawal and everything you talked about there and to give them the courage to ask a question to double bounce. You gave some real great tips there. I'm going to put the website for the Canmore Trust in the blog so people can click on, but also things like the ASIST training and the mental health training. I'm going to put the links for that as well so everyone can can actually, you

[42:32] know, what's the next step for us and and everyone's covered. So, thank you so much for your for your time and your guidance and and for for yeah, managing the Canmore Trust and and putting out that to the world for such a a great cause. Thank you so much, Jazz. It's been a pleasure to be with you. There are also Canmore Trust podcasts. You just need to Google the Canmore Trust podcast and there's a whole series of podcasts which might be helpful for people who are struggling as well. Amazing. I will also put a link for that as well. John, thank you so much for your time. I really appreciate it. >> Thank you, Jazz. It's been a pleasure. Well, there we have it, guys. Thank you so much. Honestly, really from the

[43:02] bottom of my heart. Thanks for making it to the end of this episode. It's not a sexy area of dentistry, but it is super important. I'm really proud of you for making [music] it here. This episode is eligible for CE and CPD credits. It's part of the growing initiative to encourage more CE and CPD in mental health and wellness for dentistry. To gain CE credits, we are a PACE approved education provider, by the way. Head over to protrusive.app and answer the quiz below [music] this episode. If you agree that these kind of episodes are really important, then please share it with someone. Please share it someone who you care about. Share it in your

[43:34] practice WhatsApp groups with all the associates and dentists and the entire dental team. This is one of those, like I said, that can genuinely save [music] a life. And I'm so so so grateful to John Gibson for giving up his time and his mission. Like his mission is beautiful. It comes from a point of tragedy, [music] but what he's doing now is really admirable. And we all, as a profession, thank you, Professor John Gibson. Protrusive.app, thank you so much. Next week, we continue the theme and look forward to catching you then. Same time, [music] same place, next week. Bye for now.

[44:18] >> [music]
