# Building Trust with Patients, Consent and Emotional Intelligence with Colin Campbell - PDP244
videoId: Wtugp1t-IrM
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wtugp1t-IrM
duration: 1:06:36
publishedDate: 2025-10-06
publishedTimeText: 6 months ago

[0:00] profit is oxygen for my business. Get that? It's essential for life, but it's not the meaning of life. I do not wake up in the morning going, "Oh, I'm going to get some oxygen today, but if I don't breathe, I'm dead." Right? So, we need to I don't think that's the question. I think the question is, "What would I do if you were my wife, brother, mother, daughter, son?" And so, I'd say what you want me to do is use the experience that I have to pigeon hole you as a member of my family. But world consent is a is a relationship management. You can't treat your patient as if they were you. You

[0:31] have to treat them as if they are them. I would like to say to the guys is if you want to be really successful in dentistry both in terms of financially and in terms of the respect you get from your peers and in terms of the the satisfaction you get from your job, try gaining consent for elective treatment, selling indensory, the monumental role of emotional intelligence for your happiness in your life and your career. Hello Patricerati. I'm Jazz Galati and thank you for tuning in to what I think will be a protrusive hall of famer. This episode gave me vibes of Richard Porter.

[1:03] The OGs will remember way back when we did an episode called How to Win at Life and Succeed in Densry. And we talked a lot about emotional intelligence in that episode. Brilliant episode, Richard Porto. Do go back in the archives and check it out. And this episode builds so nicely on that. Dr. Colin Campbell is absolutely scintillatingly inspiring. I'm so excited for you to be able to listen and watch this from wherever you're tuning into. Thank you so much. There are some real great gems on communication and some absolute real talk, controversial real talk from

[1:34] Colin, which I absolutely loved. So, if you're doing a lot of composite veneers, you may wish to skip this episode. Colin does not mince his words. Now, this is a PDP episode, so I owe you a protrusive dental pearl. And you know what? I might have actually given you this pearl before, like recently. Maybe I perhaps gave it in a recent episode, but it's in my head and it's so relevant for this episode, right? This audio book I listen to, Let Them. Now, if you're even slightly into, you know, Audible books or or how to look at which books are on sale right now, this book, Let Them, is

[2:05] everywhere. And for good reason. I listen to an audio book and Mel Robbins, honestly, this audio book is so so brilliantly done. You literally feel like she's talking to you. It's so easy to listen to, so conversational. And my friends, I think this book will change your life. I'm desperately pleading my wife to read this book and she won't because she doesn't read. So, as per the philosophy of this book, let her let her not read. Let her not gain from this book, but let me drip feed the lessons to her. Let me induce a degree of osmosis, informational osmosis, and take

[2:36] control of the situation. So, you kind of get a flavor of this book already. I'll put the link in the show notes. This book is all about taking control of your life and not letting what happens around you to control you and your emotions. It's about you taking control of your life. So once again, let them by Mel Robbins. I'll put the link in the show notes. And now let's check out this absolutely cracking episode with Colin Campbell. Dr. Colin Campbell, welcome to the PR podcast. How are you, my friend? >> I'm very well and I'm very excited to be here. Actually, >> you're the one who's super excited.

[3:06] >> No, no, no. I I just spent a few minutes h when I was preparing just eyeing Jaz Galati and who he was. So I I always like to do my research just to get the background because I don't think we've ever met. So I'm really I'm really pleased to be on. Thank you very much for inviting. Well, uh, I've been on the receiving end some of your lectures and I and I wanted to start by saying that as a public speaker, honestly, up there with one of the most charismatic, energetic, and human like really the way you speak. When I'm listening to you speak, Colin, it's like it's like no one

[3:37] else in the room. You're you're speaking to me, honestly. Like you have this gift. I don't know if anyone's told you this. If not, then you need to hear it. Then the way you came on my radar is dental tubules. Maybe in 2019 or something you might have done a talk about leadership. Do you remember? >> Yeah, maybe >> that and a few other lectures you done on digital dentistry implants kind kind of stuff. So honestly uh it's the pleasure is all mine to have you on the podcast and uh I know of all the wonderful things you get up to. But for those who are listening around the world, many in the UK, some in Australia, many in the US, tell us about

[4:07] yourself, Colin. >> Jeez, that's a terrible question. Uh so my name is Colin and I'm a dentist. I'm Scottish and I'm very proud of that. Uh I live in England. So I'm doing I'm doing I'm trying to do the good work at do missionary work in England of converting them to the way of the Scottish guy. And um I've been doing that I've been here for nearly 30 years. And so I live in Nottingham in England, home of Robin Hood. Um I am married to Allison and we've been together nearly 30 years. I have three children, Grace and Rosie and Callum. I'm I'm a big family. Love my family to bits obviously and and that's a big part of my life. I

[4:39] am um very proud to be a dentist. I'm like first generation first first generation university student in my family. So no one had ever been to uni before. So so my mom and dad you know did amazing things to get me to university which I which I'm so grateful for. And then I had I've had this absolutely just grandstand extraordinary journey of madness through dentistry for the past uh 31 years. And I have I honestly like I feel like someone will tap me on the shoulder any minute and tell me there's been a

[5:10] mistake and I'll have to stop and and that'll be fine because I've had such a great time. But if they don't and I stay well I'm 53. I have another 32 years left to work. So I'm working till I'm 85. So So that's that's that's the story. I mean if there's more detail I'm I'm a rural surgeon you know by trade but I don't believe in specialized dentistry anymore which is an interesting probably separate podcast. I believe in general dentistry and good general dentists. Um, and that's what we do a lot of here. And um, but I'm I'm big in the implant world in terms of that's my world. And I I get to do some

[5:42] super ridiculous cool things because of that and travel to places and meet lots of amazing people and and that's been a joy. So I have a very brilliant portfolio life doing crazy things and I don't really know how I got here because none of my plans ever came true. So uh, so that that's I hope that works as a brief introduction. J, >> absolutely. I knew that your area of interest and what you are known for and you're known for many things but like implants is your thing. I didn't I didn't I I must have forgotten that you were actually on the specialist register

[6:13] that you're oral surgeons. So I forgot about that. So great to have you on about that. So like you said though general dentistry and the fact that good general dentistry is what matters rather than specialism. So I like that little snippet. Could you c expand on that? >> Yeah. Yeah. Well, I think in the UK we we ran down the route of um of specialization a lot, right? And we and we and we sort of lauded the specialist and we never did it properly. I don't in my opinion. So, we never we never created the specializations properly and we never really let the public know what

[6:43] the difference was or or even just categorized it well enough. and and so look I got on the specialist list by default in 1999 uh when it first opened uh in surgical dentistry and then it was moved to oral surgery because they closed that because they hadn't done it properly but the problem is that like a lot of specialists are not very good dentists in my view and a lot of journalists are the most extraordinary dentists and the guys I work with around the world now um and I I get the privilege of working with because I run education for 100 countries for a for a foundation I get

[7:16] the privilege to work with the best dentists in the world and I do and I get to meet them and see their work and most of them don't consider themselves specialists. I mean they might have a ticket and here or there but they don't if you the best example is Ronnie Young who's become one of my great friends and he's he's probably the most famous certainly the most famous implant surgeon in the world and um he's University of Zurich he's a professor there same age as me but he I've watched him in clinic he he will cut a veneer prep he will do a consultation for a patient he will scale teeth if it's

[7:46] necessary he will do an extraordinary implant placement he'll restore it he will be careful with the occlusion and look at this he'll look at patient holistically, that's a dentist to me. That's what a dentist is. So, if you can't, if you're not a physician first and you're not concerned about a patient's health first, you're you're not a dentist in my view. So, and I think we lost that and I think people chased the ticket because they thought it would generate them income and um that's not true and and it shouldn't be true either. I see that and I see incredible value in being a good

[8:18] generalist and having uh array of skills not just honed into one specific uh facet. However, some of the advice that we've spoken a lot about on the podcast previously is finding your your niche. One thing I talk about is a niche kebab, right? For for every one thing that you add on, you remove something else so that you refine to like two or three things that you you love doing. Where does that fit into what you've just said just now? So I so I one of the joys of my life previously before I became injured was a tri I was triathlon. I would compete in triathlon and so I

[8:49] would swim and bike and run and I was never really that good a swimmer but I could swim you know I could swim okay. Um so you can't be a triathlete without being able to do all three. If you can't swim you can't race. Now you might get really really good at running and if you get really good at running it doesn't mean you stop to being able to swim. So if you learn how to take a tooth out it doesn't mean you forget how to take a tooth out. So my best example for you I guess there's two if I could give you them right the first one is if I'm an endodontist I'm a specialist endodontist and I open a tooth right and I look at

[9:21] it and it's cracked measial distal then you can take it out the endodontist goes I don't I don't take teeth out and the patient's going well I'm here I've traveled for an hour >> numb I'm numb I've paid for it and they're going now that's complete nonsense okay And the other one that's nonsense, I'm afraid, is orthodontists who who can't take X-rays. So that is one of my greatest bug bears, right? I think we're through that potentially, but I I've had people like that that worked with me and they go, "I don't

[9:52] take bite wings." I'm going, "What do you mean you don't take bite wings?" Right? You can't have you you don't have have you not got any hands? Why do you not take bite wings? Right. And so I've seen some ter I've seen get outs and bailouts in dentistry based on the I'm a specialist. Right. And and I and I'm sorry that you know I can see whether if the tooth to be extracted is super complex and they go it's much better if somebody better takes it out. I get that, but not if it's a centralizer, right? And I can see, you know, I can see that there are circumstances where

[10:22] the where it's better if someone who's more experienced or or more skilled in that area does it. Totally get totally get that. There's so many ways where the specialists go, I don't do that. I don't do that. You know, and and we need to just move away from that because we all we should all do our basic training. We should all learn how to cut access a tooth. We should all learn how to take a a majority of teeth out, you know, and and then we can enhance our skills from there. And then of course we can become a gen a a GDP ortho or a GDP implant or a GDP pero or a GDP and they're the really good guys. They are the really

[10:52] good guys because they can do a lot of it and they can build relationships with patients. >> Amazing. Well, I I love that because I agree with it so much and there might be some facets which we we disagree and let's see how this podcast goes. >> Let's find I love those moments Colin actually. So let's try. Okay. But there's so much to learn from you Colin because what I want to grasp from you today the first theme is consent and specifically what you do is complicated in the sense that you know you it's more specialized and complicated you know sinus lifts or uh all on next potential

[11:25] so things that are worth a lot of money things that a lot of take time things that take a lot of surgical skill and training to be able to do what I have seen from colleagues who are similar uh high level as you is that the consent the way I've seen consent being done you know my what my principles used to do that I work with in the past and what I've seen from mentors is that sometimes consent is like this 30page booklet almost and it's incred

[11:55] incredibly exhaustive so I just I just want to know right because everyone's got their own unique take on this how do you see what do you think it takes to be able to adequately consent someone to something that is a bit more refined or something that's a bit more niche treatment that's quite quite a big deal, right, for for these patients to receive surgically. Like for example, let's take an example of a wisdom tooth that's impacted. You can do that in a one or two page consent form. The fact now that the treatment you're doing is worth several times more than that or several more nuances. How does that

[12:27] change how thick that pad of consent becomes? How long does it take to consent someone? What is the procedures that you do to make sure that you can look someone in the eye and say, "You know what? I think I've adequately consented you. It's a big It's a big question. It's going to take lots of pieces, but I'd love to take your thoughts on that. >> That's brilliant. Every qu every question that you asked Jazz is another podcast. It's beautiful. Right. But but what but I I will try my best to be as brief as I can, which is not one of my greatest talents, I'm afraid. But but um first of all, you can talk about this in

[12:57] terms of the UK or you can talk about it in a broader scale. Right. So the UK is quite a unique environment for consent in the world and um I know that you have a big listener group that are outside of the UK that's so I believe so perplexity tells me anyway and so um so let's do it generically consent right if we can do that and so certainly from a UK perspective but generically for the for the world consent is a is a relationship management exercise that's what it is 100% and so in the United Kingdom and not to go into too much detail our

[13:28] consent was was massively altered by legally by a lady called Nadine Montgomery who was an extraordinary woman and I had the privilege of having dinner with Nadine Montgome and to watch her speak and and to learn all about her story and all about her son Sam and they changed consent in medicine in the UK. But when you speak to this lady who was vilified by the profession because she was the one that gave us made us much harder. It was much more difficult for us to consent patients. This was going to kill medicine. It's not at all what she wanted. She wanted us to understand her. That's it. Bang. So your job is to

[14:02] understand your patient. That's it. Now you can put down >> just explain for those who who don't know about Montgomery. Just to give us a little context background. >> So in the United in the United Kingdom basically we used to the test used to be if a reasonable other practitioner said that's the way you should go then you didn't get sued. But what happened to to Sam Montgomery and Nadine's son? Sam Nadine was pregnant and she was a diabetic and she had preeacclampsia. So she had high blood pressure and she asked for a section and she was denied a section by a female gynecologist um

[14:33] because at that stage they didn't like doing sections and Sam had an anoxic injury at birth was born cerebal palsy and when they went back to it she said you didn't listen to my concerns about this and had you listened to them he might not I might have had a section and that might not have happened but she had to she trained to be a solicitor to change the law. It took her 15 years right now. So what she said was listen to me when I'm speaking to you please because I need to tell you my concerns and what what Montgomery consent the philosophical part of Montgomery consent

[15:03] basically says know your patient in order to treat your patient. So you can't treat your patient as if they were you. You have to treat them as if they are them. So anybody who practices the way you practice jazz totally gets that. So Montgomery consent is no threat to you. The other side of this is that in countries where litigation is is high, so for example, United States, UK, Israel, right, those are the three biggest ones. Um, we're terrified of being sued. So, we defensively practice

[15:34] really heavily. That's not the case everywhere at all. It's not the case everywhere in Europe. So, you would go to Spain and assume that people would consent like they do in Britain and they don't because they don't need to because the law protects them in a different way. And even in the United Kingdom, the law protects the dentist or the physician much better in Scotland than it does in England, than it does in Ireland. So that's mental. So what you want me to give you is I I think I have it here. One second. I usually have it on I usually have it on my notice board, but it's it's I've gone somewhere else.

[16:04] I have a blank laminate, a piece of blank paper laminated, and I say, "If you want to avoid getting sued, here's your instructions." Because there isn't an instruction. You can't avoid this is human interaction. You cannot systematize it. >> Right? All you can do is do your best to understand your patient. And unfortunately for a lot of practitioners in the United Kingdom who can who still work either in the NHS or independent practice like an enhanced version of the NHS, they're time poor. Same for GPS.

[16:36] >> So you don't have the time to spend a minute to get to know the person who you're actually treating. And if you spend a if you take a minute then you consent patients. And of course we back that up with what we do now is we do everything based online. We have online booklets which explains every procedure. We do a bespoke letter to the patient and we say read your booklets and ask any question about the booklet that you want. But when you sign at the bottom we've assumed you've read the booklet and you've answered all I've answered all your questions and we give them the headline potential complications. Right?

[17:06] And that's all we do. But we've done that in an environment where the patient trusts us and we always, you know, if we're doing a say an immediate fertile arts case for a patient, we'll go to a patient. This is really complicated. There's lots that can go wrong. So, we don't sell it on a false premise and I think people get into a lot of trouble because there's they're desperate for the work. So, they downplay the the good and the bad side. You know, taking all of someone's teeth out and replacing them with implants is a huge huge procedure. And it's it's not the same on the other side.

[17:37] I just want to add in because I'm enjoying this, but I just want to add in one thing very pertinent to what you just said there is sometimes colleagues will say that I'm I'm afraid of going too making the conversation too negative and warning of all the risk because then I'll I'll lose the quote unquote I'll lose the sale. I'll lose the treatment acceptance. I'll lose the that's point of consent. It's but it's also because you need so much emotional intelligence to be a healthcare practitioner. Clearly that's the thing. You can talk people out of any treatment you want. It's dead easy to talk him out of treatment, right? Because you just say that, well,

[18:08] this could go catastrophically wrong. You're it's a it's a pragmatism test with the patient. You're you're gauging the level of pragmatism. If you are unable to ex if you're unable to accept a certain degree of risk, do not have this treatment. Yeah. And I I this year I became a surgical patient. I had a quite a big surgical procedure carried out 10 nine 10 weeks ago. And um I went catapulted into the world of going and in medicine and private medicine. I mean, they never consented me in writing, hardly at all. It was ludicrous, right? And I was totally cool

[18:39] with that because we had a chat about it and he said, "Look, there's not a lot to go wrong with you, but it could." And in fact, something did go wrong, right? But that's that's the deal. Okay? And if you can get to that with the patient, I think there's a word for it that we used to use in healthcare ages ago. Trust. That was the word. That's what it was called. And so, you're trying to develop a trust relationship, right? But you, if you are a crook, it's your your trust is false. If you're not, there's nothing to worry about. >> It's being your authentic self and and

[19:09] allowing your allowing the human side like emotional intelligence is the best way to do it. Having respect for the patient enough to to give them an opportunity to back out of something that perhaps is not for them. And the only way you'll know that is discovery of who the patient is in front of you. >> 100% right. And there's also just a final little aside to this because my daughter who is not a dentist and none of my kids are in healthcare because I'm a terrible example. Um they well my middle daughter is a physiootherapist so I guess that counts as healthcare but um um my eldest daughter is a biochemist but when she was at final school she did a a project at um at Cambridge

[19:40] University. She never went to Cambridge but she did a project when she was at school and it was a it was psychology. It was assessing the degree of risk that practitioners applied to their patients or to their family as patients. Get it? So let's say you've got two however old your wife is. Let's say she's 25 jazz. Right? So your wife is 25 and you have another 25-year-old patient and they both need a wisdom tooth out. You're liable to push the one you don't know away and take the risk on the one you do, which is mental because you believe in the treatment and you understand the risk benefit analysis and you think you

[20:11] won't get sued. And that's an awful world to be in, right? So we actually will be happy to take greater risks on people that we love because we know the benefits are worth the risk than we are on patients that we're concerned about because we didn't get to know them in the first place. Well, that that's the epitome of defensive dentistry, isn't it? Right there. The fact that you you're not willing to help someone who may may benefit from that treatment overall, but because we're afraid, you rather push it to someone else or or not offer it. And that that really is defensive density right there. >> And of course, the ultimate sales tool, if you want a sales tool, is to explain

[20:43] two procedures to the patient and say, so let's say you are my how old can I how old are Jazz? How old are you? Yeah, >> I'm I'm 35. >> Right. Okay. So, you are genuinely young enough to be my son. So, I'm going to say um here's the two options, Chaz. If you were my son, Callum, I promise you that's the one I would do. And if you have developed the trust, nine times out of 10, the patient goes, that's the one I would like. If you're if you're true, if that's true, I'll take it. But it comes >> if that's what you would say to a I mean, this is something that you this is how you communicate to a patient. Yeah. I think I resonate with that and and I

[21:14] think that's cuz patients often ask, "What would you do?" And so, let's tackle that, right? Cuz I'm sure you get that all the time when when a patient asks you, "What would what would you do?" How do you then make sure that you're not giving them the answer? Because it's not important what you would do, Colin. It's important that you've understood them well enough to relay back to them that actually based on what you've said so far and based on what's important to you, this is what I would do based on you, not on me. But how do you have that discussion more elegantly? >> Yeah. I So I would spin that back to the patient and say, I don't think that's the I don't think that's the question. I

[21:46] think the question is, what would I do if you were my wife, brother, mother, daughter, son? And so I say what you want me to do is use the experience that I have to pigeon hole you as a member of my family and then to treat you accordingly. >> I love that. That's great. That's wonderful. I'm going to I'm going to keep that uh as a as a teaser at the beginning of the episode. That's that's that's awesome. All right. Wonderful. So, um with with the consent going back to it. So, you said you have the the pre-online stuff that they do. So, they already have some

[22:17] um prior information. They've kind of pre-qualified themselves, right? And then you have some discussion in the clinic where you get to know them and you decide okay is this dance for both of you or not. And then of course there's the the squiggle at the at the end where people say it's not worth the the ink is printed on etc. Um how are your consent forms like massive and your treatment plan letters because cuz quite often I've heard is the treat and plan letter is not really for the patient. Yes, it's addressed to the patient but that treatment plan letter is for the

[22:48] lawyers. >> Yeah. Let me let me um take you back a step toward the process if can I do that? >> Yeah, please pick an implant. See a patient who is referred to me or or refers himself to me for an implant consultation. First of all, it's 1 hour, right? And and people will say, well, it's all right for you. Well, it's not all right for me. That it's an hour. And that's that is what you would call in business a loss leader. I do not get in that hour enough money to pay that site you're running. Okay? So, let's be clear about that. But we still charge for that. We charge what seems like a

[23:18] big number for that, but it doesn't cover our cost. And one of my big areas of interest is is the business of dentistry, right? And so, so we see the patient for an hour. The first and we we we and I'm not I came on here and I do I'm not interested in punting anything that we do, Jazz. I just wanted to have a chat with you. But we do teach this formulaically. Okay. >> And there's ways of doing this. And we divided the hour into four 15 minutes. So if you choose to do it as a 20 minute consultation, you can divide it into fives. But fives are not long enough, right? But that's fine. I get it. I get you might have to do that, right? So the first 15 minutes is called building the bridge to trust. So the patient gets

[23:49] pre-qualified by a TCO who are brilliantly trained who say what do you need? What do you want? And we have 56 of us here. So they get put in the right place depending upon what it seems like they need. So there's there's lots of people doing implants here. So often people will be well I call and treated my husband 10 years ago or whatever it is right? So they come and see me and they sit down and I go it's really nice to meet you and the first 15 minutes is nothing to do with dentistry of any kind. And the person 15 minutes is with the TCO is with you. Sorry. >> No, no, no. This the TCO happens beforehand. >> Well, the pre the TCO's talk to them on

[24:20] the phone, booked their appointments, got their information, that information is all set up for me before I see the patient. Any concerns the patient has, what they might be interested in, what the history is, that's all done, right? So, you're using the team, enhancing the team all the time. >> And then the patient comes in and then you say, and then they say, "Let me tell you about this." And I go, "No, no, no, no. I need to know about you for the reasons that we've just discussed." Only once have I ever had kickbacks from that where I go, "Why are you asking all these questions?" And I'll say to him because I can't decide what I think you might want unless I know who you are as a person. And so that we call that building the

[24:51] bridge to trust. And the purpose of that is a to find out about the patient and b to open the door to share personal information. Because psychologically if you allow me to share information about me, you will share information about you and we will trust each other. It's basic human interaction. I will make myself vulnerable to show you that you can trust me. Right? It's really clear how we do that. The second 15 is the mechanics. We do that. >> Can we break this down? Because obviously we can go in any way we want in this podcast, but this 15 minutes

[25:23] like a lot of colleagues will be uncomfortable with this because they may be coming from a background where their entire consultation is 15 minutes, right? And now to spend 15 minutes to to learn about someone, it seems like an awful long amount of time because I've experienced this before with colleagues who who have moved from one type of practice and to another practice where we had do much longer consultations and you notice that patients are coming in, they're booked in for an hour but they're leaving after 20 minutes uh because the the clinician is just so used to doing everything so quickly. What kind of like in the whole interviewing sequence like how do you

[25:56] encourage the patient to to warm up and and loosen up and and and talk about and what exactly do you want to know? Do you want to know about their their cats and dogs names and and and what they do on the weekends and uh like to to what degree are you learning about them? >> So we so so we I totally get that right and it's important that when you enter this world of practice which is a different level of practice to that which a lot of people are working at and to quote the film Rocket Man and I use this quote a lot of the time you have to kill the person you were born to be to become the person you want to be. Okay. And that's difficult. So you don't get

[26:27] this is not easy nor is it supposed to be easy. Right? You can learn it and you can practice it. And it's been well proven that emotional intelligence is a developable skill. It's a practiceable skill. EQ is not. IQ is not, but EQ is, right? So, what we're looking for is a series of opening gambits, right? And conversational opening gambits to seek out a common ground with the patient. Right. So, if I was saying to you, do you have any children? >> What would you say? >> I've got two boys. Two young boys. Six and two. >> How old are the boys? Six and two. Yeah.

[26:58] You said six and two. What are they like? What is your six-year-old like? What What is he like? >> Well, we're organizing Well, his sixth birthday's coming up. We're doing a Marvel themed birthday party. He's absolutely in love with Marvel. He plays cricket on Fridays and yes, it's a great season of life to to to be a dad. >> So, so I have a 17-year-old boy called Callum, right? So, he used to be six and during the ages of between about 6 and 14, we were able to go do the whole of the Marvel universe as it came out. >> Nice. to up into we saw we saw Endgame when it was just released.

[27:30] >> And so I can promise you that if you share that with your son now, the benefits you get when he's 17 are extraordinary. Do you see what I just did? >> Yes. Absolutely. Yeah. You you gave something a personal information about yourself. >> It took me one question to do that. Sometimes it takes more than one question. Are you married? Do you have children? What do you do for work? Did you travel far when you got here? What was your last holiday? Do you read? Do you like books? Do you like movies? whatever it is you want to share and you'll get to the point where and there's six degrees of separation ancient research from the United States. If we got into this podcast for long

[28:02] enough, we would be able to find our sixth degree of separation. You'd be able to say, well, actually my uncle lived in this part of Scotland for a little while and then he moved here and I do, oh my god, my mom and dad lives there. And we would go bang and you almost always reach that moment in that 15 minutes where you go bang, that's us. Do you see how we're connected? Shall we continue with some dentistry? And it's it's not it's not difficult. It just takes a bit of explanation to do and a little bit of practice. >> Imagine your imagine that was your work. Imagine part of your

[28:33] work was to do that. What a beautiful job that is. >> Well said. Well said. So to to build that bridge is is a truly wonderful thing. Now I've seen some of your social media stuff um and also in your lectures you talk about books and stuff. If someone if a young dentist like is wanting to quite rightly develop their EQ, which is one of the most important things they could set themselves up for their career, right? Are there any resources, books, courses, anything that you could recommend to help develop their EQ? >> Well, first of all, they won't read a book because they're younger than me.

[29:04] And so, if I recommend them or buy them a book, they'll never read it. So, what they'll want is an AI summary in about 251. So what I would suggest the young person, let me let me bracket this in age, is if you're under 25, go to chat GPT or Claude, whatever you like, right? And ask for a 250word summary of Emotional Intelligence by Daniel Gleman and ask for another 250 word summary of Talking to Strangers by Malcolm Gladwell. And once you've taken the effort of reading that 500 words, you

[29:34] won't be qualified, but you can use that as a platform for moving forward. If you're over if you're older, if you're if you're between 25 and 40, listen to them on audiobook. And if you're over 40, read them on a Sunday afternoon in your conservatory. >> I love that. [laughter] Okay, so at least you have two book recommendations and different media in which to consume depending on what phase of what season of life you're in. The first 15 minutes, what are the second, third, and fourth 15 minute segments of that implant constellation? >> Second is the mechanics. So that is the

[30:05] the absolutely standardized formulaic examination for a patient which is and I'm not I promise I wouldn't swear on this podcast. I promise I won't. I nearly did. It's absolutely cast iron. Right? So if someone comes to get you, you filled in all the stuff you were supposed to fill in. Complaining of your history of present complaint, your past medical history, your acclusal analysis, all of your stuff is done. Right. So just do >> Yeah. Yeah, with an extraordinary nurse who does your notes and take your photographs and check if you need any radioraphs. I don't take a lot of

[30:35] radioraphs nowadays at consultations. But that's probably pattern recognition from experience. I'm cool if you take radioraphs if you want them and sometimes I do, but usually I can formulate a plan provisionally for a patient and usually I CBCT everybody because it's implant work, right? But actually I'll do that if you accept the plan, but I'm not frying you if you don't. Yeah. And um so that's that's that bit. And then the third part of it is the is the bit where you go okay let's pull together what the possibilities are for you here right and

[31:05] so that is pulling the possibilities together showing the patient what sort of options they might have for treatment and having that discussion initially hello YouTube patrusi I know you're watching on YouTube and I hope you're enjoying this episode so far but I wanted to highlight in case you don't know yet we have an amazing viewing experience on protrusive.app app, our website, our network, our platform. So, I just want to spend a minute to show you what this looks like. On the left side, you see the navigation and when you join the app, you get a 1 minute video tour of the entire network. Now,

[31:36] in terms of where the magic happens, that's in the protrusive community cuz you might come for the content, but you'll stay for the community of the nicest and geekiest dentists in the world. We have all these polls. We have a chat group. There's always active chats and dentists helping dentists. And really what I wanted to do is create a really supportive environment that's not like the environment we have on Facebook and it's built on the values of niceness and geekiness. If you are nice and geeky, you belong here. Now, to make this a safe space, we have a manual process of approval. We actually verify

[32:08] that you are a dental professional before you get in here. So, we have hundreds of applicants a day. So, if it's been about 2 days and you haven't heard anything, either something's in your junk or you need to reach out. If you're still waiting to join your tribe, email marie protrusive.co.uk. That's m a r i protrusive.co.uk and she'll investigate what's happened. Now, all the videos you have on YouTube are also on here, but you actually have some extra ones for free that you don't have on YouTube. So, you get some bonus content that's not on YouTube. And actually, for the future, I'm not taking

[32:39] things out of YouTube, but some things are not appropriate for the wider public, and I want to sort of safeguard that information, which is like dentist talk, if you like. So that's why a lot of the content is only here and not on YouTube. So you're kind of missing out if you're not on here. That's why I'd love for you to join there. And if you join one of our paid plans, then what you get is access to the CE quiz like this one and you can get CPD or CE certificates and also you get our premium notes. So these are a great aid memoir or revision for an episode to really cement your learning. And whilst we have ads and YouTube places ads on

[33:11] YouTube, we don't have that on our network. So, for the paid plan, you get to see all of the premium notes without any of the ads. And of course, you get to support team Protrusive and help us to continue what we're doing. I'm just going to gloss over the Protrusive Vault, which has all our infographics and downloadables. These are all our master classes at this moment in time. And we're always planning to add more. And if you look at there's about 1, two, three, about seven of them. But actually, if you look at the replay section, some of the live master classes that I've done and some of the training that people pay for on other websites is all on there included as part of the

[33:42] masterclass subscription. And if you're a student, don't fear. We have a special section for you with all the student notes which anyone can access. So for example, here is one on Exodia. So it's all there waiting for you on Protrusive Guidance. Please head over to the website which is protrusive.app, make an account on your browser. This could be Safari, Chrome, however you want to do it. And once you've made your login, then you can download the iOS or Android app and then log in through there. So the reason to make the subscription primarily on the website first is that you get access to the free

[34:12] trial which you don't get if you make an account on Android iOS. If you make it on the website, you get access to the free trial and you get our best price if you sign up through protrusive.app. So our best deals and free trials are only on protrusive.app. Of course, we always put the link below in the description. And thank you so much for enjoying our videos on YouTube. But it's now finally time to level up your experience. Back to the episode. And that runs into the fourth part which is then the after part of the consultation. So how do you follow that up? Who follows it up and what do they get and how do you consent

[34:43] a patient afterwards? Right? And so so that you know what to tell you what happens in our place and I can show anybody how to set this up and it's extraordinary is that TCO deals with a patient and we've got five TCOs here. They're fantastic but they're so dialed into our philosophy of how to work right. So so and our philosophy of sales. I kind of hate sales but we have to sell things. So they bring the patient in all the information. So generally speaking they come in we do the consultation generally they pick that person who's already spoken to the patient picks them up again other side right not on the day I say to them we'll be in touch within a day or two. Now we

[35:14] also have an MDT here which is a multi-disiplinary team group which discuss cases every Tuesday a lot of the patients go to that they love that >> but it's a huge thing that different podcast but they um but if it's straight if it's relatively straightforward >> I dictate the plan I fill the plan in on my which is densely we use right >> and those plans are presented really well they're standardized in the presentation fantastic I dictate a bespoke letter to the patient on Slack and that letter is then formulated and it's put in a lovely package digitally with the treatment plans and it goes out

[35:46] of dentally to the patient. Now it goes we can tell when the patient opened it obviously because dentally's they can tell from which what IP address it was opened on at what time. So if they ever tell us they haven't read it we'll go well you opened it. A few there's a few things happen then patient opens it and signs it. That happens. They haven't even been back for a second consultation. The next thing that happens is the TCO phones them and says are you happy with it? They say I've got some questions. The TCO answers the questions. They sign it and they all come for diagnostics with a nurse not with me. So then the nurse does a diagnostic appointment for these guys into treatment. The next thing that

[36:17] happens is they have if they don't want to do they want more questions they have a teleconference with me right they have a zoom call recorded and the final thing is they come back to talk to me again but that used to be the standard format first consultation second consultation I second consult now maybe 10% of cases because they go ahead with treatment because of the process or they have a zoom call at the end of treatment and the zoom calls are much quicker and they're recorded and they're much better and I can show them all the photos and the x-rays on a zoom call. So the process we have now is is really good but it's based around the fact that they trust it to and I can show you. We

[36:49] invented the treatment box. I don't know if you've ever seen it. Haven't got one here. In the analog days we did this with Chris Barrow. He took it around the country. We had this beautiful it was like an iPad case. It would when it fell out it had an SD card in it with Campbell Clinic SD card. It had a tea bag. It had all the documents printed under here but had them all electronic here. And we put it through the post and that's what arrived. >> We've done that digitally now. We still do have that, but we do it more digitally now. So that part of the how you present the plan, that's kind of like a given, right? That's like

[37:19] checking the patient's occlusion after you do a composite, right? That's got to be right. And it has to be good depending upon what level of the market you're at. >> But the key, the secret sauce is at the start of the process. >> Okay. So it's all the data gathering that you've done beforehand. It's the TCO involvement. And it reminds me of Sorry, you were going to say >> the trust. It's the trust. building the >> truck that that first 15 minutes is absolutely golden. Without that, you can't get to where you do eventually end up. And so, go back to a little detail though, like imagine you're doing this immediate, you know, full arch implant

[37:50] treatment. And going back to what I said about making those treatment plan letters like they're as though they're for the lawyers, right? Not so much for the patient, but the patient is the recipient. To what degree do you subscribe to that? to what degree in the in the digital sort of sending of these you know Adobe sign or whatever you might use is it would you say that compared to your colleagues or people practicing a civil level as you uh can you describe what your plans may be like compared to some other industry examples. >> So I was I was an expert witness at

[38:22] quite a high level for 10 years. So I experted in in criminal cases beyond civil cases as well. So I can tell you that the law is an ass and effectively everything becomes a negotiation. So whatever you do to protect yourself, it's not enough. So stop stressing about getting to 100% and don't. Now the way we do it is we have in your consent letter, we have all these links. So we'll say dental implant information, full arch reconstruction information, endodontic information and we put those in if it's appropriate for

[38:53] that treatment plan and the the the our admin support does that. So we say in the letter, make sure you read all that stuff. I've told you about it, but make sure you read it. It's credit card. They're credit card T's and C's. When did you last read your credit card T and C? And so never ever. And did you ever say, well, I'm not having the credit card because actually it remains their property at all times. Never. Right. So, but you do get patients who want it. This is the spectrum. So what we also do when we talk about consultations is, and we're getting a bit deeper here, is there we've got five types of

[39:23] personalities for consultations, right? five types of personalities, right? So, take my personality type, right? I'm a CEO personality. I'm I'm not a CEO, but what I do is so I can tell you that within about we'd never spoken before today. I'd never met you. >> Within about 30 seconds, she has I really like you and I trust you because that's what the CEO personality does. But that's what the CEO personality does, right? >> And so, and so if you if you stitch me up, the wrath will be terrible. So when you get the CEO personal when I go for my it was a knee operation I had when I

[39:55] meet the surgeon in the waiting room I had I had bought him done and he's going to me we'll send you an estimate I'm going blah blah yeah yeah yeah but it's you so the CEO personality they trust really quickly and so they they're never reading a word of what you sent never they won't say anything the book have you read surrounded by idiots >> yes yes so you're very much the the the red dominant 100%. Right? So, but the other personality types are the engineer. So,

[40:25] the engineer goes, if you can't if you can't get the engineer, I just want to show you a prop, right? If you can't get the engineer and tell him, this is a fantastically clever printed crown that I'm not telling you about in the podcast, but if if you can't tell him exactly what that's made of and why, you've lost. So, the accountant personality, they don't have to have these jobs. They're detail about the detail and about the money and all of this stuff. And they have to be really clear. the teacher, they want to tell you and then the what the worst one for ethical drag is the passive. That's the 40 the 50 60 year old lady who's lost her husband who

[40:57] trusts you who's got plenty of money and you go or do you know what I'm going to spend your money. So you have to be really clear in your ethics for treating that patient that so that forms part of that process of building the bridge to trust because those guys need a different calling. Each of them needs a different calling and that's emotional intelligence, right? And and and you can build on that and you do that, but we give you a framework because because it seems complicated now and you have to practice it, >> but and that's serving patients for what they need. It's not gaming the system. There's nothing bent about it. It's saying as a professional, I'm prepared

[41:29] to be the person you need me to be to look after you. And what I like about that is and in your communication, in your letters, you are making sure that all bases are covered so that they can go as deep as they want. For example, if someone wants to read the T's and C's for a credit card is there, but a bit like me and you, I'm very similar to that. Like, you know, I'm very quick to make decisions. I'm very slow to change them. And so, I go by trust. My currency is trust. Maybe my principles who listen to the podcast as well, maybe they don't want to hear this. Maybe they do want to hear it. I don't read the contract though when I sign. I know lots of people get very deep into the associate contract. >> It's not my personality type. I go by

[42:00] trust. I looked John and Chris in the eye. I was like, "Do I trust these two?" Well, John, I went to dent school with is one of my best friends. I was like, "Yeah, I trust these guys." And we bury the contract. And the day you need to pick it up is the day that we need to rip it up and and and move on. I don't look at it again. Right. Right. So, that's how I operate. But I appreciate that I my patients are not reflection of me. They're very different. And therefore, >> the way I do it, Colin, is I do a lot of Loom videos. >> The Loom personaliz. >> Exactly. But I know that for a lot of dentists, they struggle. They messaged me saying jazz you talk about loom but my first one took me an hour to do right

[42:33] and so whereas I can bash them out in 5 minutes everyone again it's it's it's a it's a exercise that you got to practice and practice and refine it may not be that exactly >> you have to systematize your process whatever your process is the the the phrase over the overriding phrase for our consent process is a sheep um uh a sheep a sheep in wolf's clothing that's what we are so we're prepared to put on wolf's clothing for our consent but we're a sheep so we're soft and But as far as the consent is concerned, if you go into my consent, it's as good as anybody's, but it just doesn't look

[43:04] like a 45page missive, right, document that that terrifies you. That's the thing that terrifies you, right? And so I'll say to the patients, these are the risks that you could get from this. But you know, I worked in headneck cancer, so I see how people are consented. My wife works in children's cancer still. People are consenting for cancer operations on half a sheet of paper. We are a little bit vain and obsessed about ourselves, you know, a little bit, you know, we're not really that important, jazz, not really. We should always not be too, we shouldn't take ourselves too seriously, you know. >> Excellent. Well, I'm going to move on to

[43:35] the next. I thoroughly enjoy that. The next bit I want to discuss is elective treatments and a common scenario which we all face in our career at some stage probably early on is like the patient who comes in and and just to make it relatable to most dentists who are listening to this. So I don't want to talk about like full arch implant stuff that you do but let's say a patient comes in and says look I'd like to have a gold crown on my front tooth. >> Okay. Okay. So, that old that old scenario which we've all faced before, maybe not or we know a colleague who's who's discussed it >> in the pub with you or or on a Facebook

[44:06] group more modernly, how do you like do you where do you draw the line for yourself? Like cuz you might think that hm is this really appropriate, but is this is this criminal? Like can I do it? Can I not? What decision-m criteria and and what kind of consent skills do we need to be able to consent someone for this kind of electric treatment which which you don't think that you would want in your mouth and you don't believe in but it's it may not be like too farfetched. A lot of dentistry is philosophy and the law is applied philosophy. And if you're not, we don't

[44:36] teach our children philosophy, which is a huge shame because it helps us to navigate this this stuff and who we are and what we think. And so the analogies to this stuff that I've always used. So we we have a we have a principle in the practice that we use when we teach a lot. And if you saw me speak, you probably saw a slide that said prethics on it, right? And it's a linear analog scale and that's profit of one end and then ethics of the other. If we don't make a profit, we die, right? and we can't treat anyone. But if we do that too much, we should be killed. Okay? And so we we can't be all ethics and no

[45:08] profit, but we can be all profit and no ethics. So we as a team talk about this a lot. Where do we strike? And that's a philosophical decision. Interestingly, and I'll always like to reference this kind of thing. I I've not been on social media for 10 years, right? Came off in 2015, and my last Instagram post was a picture of my breakfast in 2015. as a practice, as a business, we have a lot of that going on, but I don't really see it because it wasn't very good for me to be honest. And um and I knew that from early on, but people do bring things to me and say, "Look at this. Have you seen this?" And there's this there's a guy who was batting around recently who was

[45:39] comparing composite buildups to the price for having your nails done. And he was just going, you know, if you have your nails done, you might as well have composite buildups. So to me, and let's be clear about that, that's abhorrent. having composite buildups and I've had composite buildups for wear recently and my wife never noticed has still hasn't noticed I've had them done but my teeth were 50% worn down. So I've had I was I had them for functional reasons and I'm delighted I had them right. But to do it on a 22y old we have to be really careful of that because that is not without significant

[46:09] long-term risk. Get it? to restore those teeth, to put in a plaque trap, to to to to in any way mechanically prep those teeth in any way is a huge problem, right? And so we have to be really clear with the patients and tell them that, but we don't because we sell it as a fashion aid. It's not like buying a top or a pair of shoes and it shouldn't be like that. >> It's not well nails and nails, it's not like nails, right? because your nails will grow back. >> And so, so you clearly

[46:42] >> we a we have a we have a responsibility to position ourselves where we think the ethics set for us. I always go back to do no harm. Part of my graduation, I I was required to to to recite the hypocratic oath. Right. Love it. Right. So, first do no harm. I I as a practitioner, I will not harm you more than I help you. Okay? And so so I still subscribe to that and I 100% subscribe to the fact that dentistry is a subsp specialty of medicine. I 100% subscribe to that and that changes how you look after people.

[47:13] Composite buildups for aesthetic reasons that's not medicine. And so that's hairdressing. Let's be clear about that. That's there's no health benefit to that. Don't tell me there's a psychological benefit. There's no health benefit to that. And so I won't >> the first thing that comes to our mind as I mean I I agree but there'll be lots of listeners who are listening to this right now saying no no no they disagree it's a skill it's artistries it's giving confidence it helps the mental health of the patient and they'll be thinking that but but then I would say that one of the things that was taught to me I did a diploma in ortho and actually I I like

[47:44] the thing that the educator was saying was actually there are very few cases of ortho which actually are functional and health ortho the primary benefit orthorontics is aesthetics. Yep. It absolutely is. I don't get me started on ortho. I absolutely believe that. Right. But I'm absolutely cool with straightening healthy teeth because I know that the long-term prognosis of those teeth is rarely not not not entirely, but rarely affected. I see plenty of resorption from orthal cases that we have to treat, right? So again,

[48:16] that's not without its risks, which should be explained. But covering teeth in polymer, right, is that's a totally different game. You're doing that not you're doing it quick. You're doing it to create an appearance which is unnatural, fashionable. And so I know that people will disagree with this, but do you know what? We have to say it like it is, right? And so you can I happily have that conversation with whoever you like. So the first treatment for someone like that is to straighten their teeth up. We don't do we don't do aesthetic composite buildups where there's minimal advantage to the patient. Not at all. We just don't do it. We won't do it. Right.

[48:47] I mean just say you mean you Colin I know you don't know anything about me in that regard in my clinical practice but you know I made this video which again got a lot of love but also got a lot of hate because I said very much like what you're saying now is like I don't like seeing teeth plaster with composite and I got a lot of push back on social media from people who who like doing so but I I'm with you and all of or most of my orthorontic cases that I do like you know aligners and stuff once I've got the teeth in enamel whitened yes and looking great I don't want to touch them I don't want to have to put composite on

[49:18] them. Whereas I know people are quick to do that and then to to build more volume, give the wow effect, give that shine with with the composite. And I and I see lots of my colleagues do that. But uh I'm not just saying this to agree with you, but I think just to for those who are listening right now that actually I think that's a great point that you know when you do that it's not as reversible as we're saying. So the kind of um language is being spoken on social media. Colin, I know you said you're not on social media that much now, but like people are saying no injections, no drilling, no this. We'll

[49:48] put, you know, eight 10 composite veneers in 3 hours kind of thing. And that I think has got lifetime implications that probably are not discuss >> lifetime implications, right? And you've not been doing it for that long. So you don't know if it hasn't got lifetime implications. The problem is it's a relatively new thing but it's not new jazz in its principle because in the ' 90s we were doing Larry Larry Rosenal veneerology and veneerology was to protect that's all the same arguments were used there and so so and what we

[50:19] see now for the Larry Rosen veneerology is terrible right so when we were using porcelain to do this it was awful and it's not I mean we're not prepping perhaps as much but let's be clear you're sticking resin onto these teeth you're creating plaque trap perhaps you're creating ledges and please don't pretend that everybody that's doing this is an artist. They're not an artist. Right? At the very top two or 3% they are an artist. But the guys that are doing it quick down the bottom end, it's garbage, right? And we're seeing it coming through the door and they they're

[50:49] not finished properly. They're and they're done cheap. It's just it's really bad work, right? And it and it it misrepresents dentistry as a profession when it's done badly like that. And I'm sorry and I know people won't like that, but you can't please all the people all the time, Jazz. And sometimes it's important to say to say so sometimes it's important to say what's true. Would my kids have that? >> Absolutely never. Would they have that? >> Okay. No, that and I'm glad we moved away from that gold crown scenario because actually what you're saying is far more relatable which is the composite veneer wave that we're seeing right and and this is a huge thing like

[51:21] my social media the algorithms are just constantly showing me this right and yes I get it with a peg lateral okay like you know to actually that has got some space and size issues and stuff and and I get it but when you're seeing so what I'm seeing is lots of eight or nine out of 10 smiles being converted to the short-term 10 through the use of resin veneers and stuff and I think that's where you're saying that actually that's the point at which do we see the the the benefit and risk analysis way up and what you were saying the whole prefix thing that actually that one probably maximizes on the profit and not so much

[51:52] on the on the ethics so that was just a reflection not so much a question listen they the it would be very easy for us Ju and I to create an index for treatment for comals and um we would be able to look at the case aesthetically and say is there a significant aesthetic detriment to this patient which could be causing a psychological upset objectively. And very few of those cases would qualify. And you know that's true. And so if we set up that we should do that. And if we set up that objective um of that objective index and anybody who

[52:22] did it apart from that with clear clinical photographs before the treatment went to jail um then lots less people would do it. And I know that the good the benefit of not being on social media is it's very difficult for the trolls to get to me. So I think that's why it's possible for me to speak about it. They still will though. Someone will in a roundabout way still manage. >> I'm sure they will. But look, I think it's important to discuss these and uh whilst I do host guests who are veneerologists and and do wonderful beautiful work >> and you should you should

[52:52] >> Yeah. perspectives. Yeah. Yeah. >> But I I I like your perspective and I and I agree with it in the sense that I'm not so prolific in the whole composite engineering. I think there's a beauty to enamel and so that is a level of elective treatment that everyone needs to decide okay where where do they which side of the line they're on and actually to have a some sort of line somewhere. So what before we move on to the final thing which is about selling and densory what's the final piece of advice that you want to give to a young dentist about uh elective treatments and staying safe and doing the right thing

[53:23] when it comes to elective yeah so the gold crown was an extreme example I'm glad we moved away from it but composite veneer is a wonderful real world example what advice do you want to give in terms of elective treatments >> okay I think that I think that and this could take just a minute or two but >> I I been talking to new graduates since 1998 and you you'd asked me earlier on about a lecture that I did for dentinal tubes or something. I think I stopped counting lectures about 2,000 right so I've done a lot of speaking >> so I can't quite remember everyone that

[53:53] I've done but the so I developed these approaches as we talked >> can I remind you something that that from that lecture I'll remind you something Colin it was when you spoke about leadership and an example of leadership you gave is a patient comes in and they had like an amalgam tattoo or something right and she was like I remember. Yeah. >> Is it is this cancer? And you like well actually everyone's like bouncing around cuz they're afraid to say that it's not cancer. You're like it's not cancer. Don't worry. I have that leadership. That's I remember that >> that was a clinical leadership point. Yeah. I I did use that for a while. But

[54:24] the uh so so we talked to guys and go you know what when I first five years of my career was in hospital service, right? So I was in five years or the first five years part of it was hospital service and NVT. when I added up my wage, I'd spent twice the amount of time working and I'd gained half the money of my mates that went into practice, right? But I exited with a fellowship in surgery and an insight into implant dentistry and various type of things. And I think for most of my friends, I've made far far more money than anybody's made that I graduated with, right? And I've been so privileged and so lucky, right? And and and that's the funny

[54:54] thing because I think a lot of the people have been brought into dentistry on a promise of what they'll make. Yeah. And it's harder and harder in dentistry now to make the money that you've been promised. And I've been telling that story for many years now. What I would like to say to the guys is if you want to be really successful in dentistry, both in terms of financially and in terms of the respect that you get from your peers and in terms of the the satisfaction you get from your job, try and be good from the very get-go, right? Just try and be good because there's always a place for good in the market. If you get close to the top 10% of the market, you will be remunerated really

[55:25] well. You'll be thought of really well. You'll have a lot of colleagues that you trust and like. Your staff will stay with you because they respect you. All of that stuff. But if you start by trying to be rich, you're unlikely to get good. So if you start good, you'll probably be good and rich. But if you start trying to be rich, the likelihood is you'll probably never be good. And what happens to guys at my age, and you'll see it, is they get desperate to lecture or desperate to speak or desperate to justify themsel because they've got enough money or a lot of money and then they go, "But I'm not,

[55:56] nobody thinks I mean." They're isolated in a position. And the guys who are speaking, the really brilliant world class guys that are speaking over here are doing that. But I've just spent 25 years trying to be really good at what I do. And so see the young guys >> buy a camera, right? Do the focus photography course, which is I've got no link to that apart from it's brilliant, isn't it? and um right and and do do this photography course and start photographing your work and be proud of it and realize that >> that building a career is is is building

[56:27] and it builds and builds and builds and don't do anything to people that you wouldn't do your own family. >> That's straightforward. Brilliant. Hey guys, Jazz interjecting here. Listen to Colin. Colin is telling you just like my mentors tell me all the time when I was a new grad, the first thing I was taught was take photos. And it is shocking. Like obviously we see so many photos on social media. So I know lots of dentists are taking photos, but actually it's still the minority. It is shocking how few dentists overall are taking photos. And no, I'm not including phone photos

[56:59] as photos. Okay, phone photos are not proper photos. You want to take really beautiful photos, do what Colin says. Get yourself on a photography course. There's a lot you can learn on a hands-on course. Fancy shots, studio lighting, that kind of stuff. But if all you want is the foundations and to be able to take a consistent series of photos, good acclusal photos, good frontal photos, well exposed, wellframed, then I invite you to take on the 21-day photography challenge in just 3 weeks in videos that range from 3 minutes to 10 minutes. One video per

[57:29] day, you can learn photography to a very good level. And then you can fly if you choose to go on a hands-on course. The 21-day challenge is available on the app Protrusive Guidance. We just literally launched it last month. and it's been great to see your portrait photos and your engagement throughout the different lessons. I look forward to awarding you with your badges. Anyway, back to the episode. >> Well, I I think we have to I mean I could speak to you for days and days, Colin. Uh and uh I think instead of going deep into the final thing about what is your view on selling density, but I think I think you have spoken about this for so long that I think

[58:00] you're able to give us a post-it note version of your definition of sales in densory. Is selling the whole thing about is selling a dirty word? So some dentists get very upset about this topic whereas other dentists are very proactive and saying hey we sell all the time when we speak to our spouse we are selling an idea that kind of stuff. We all heard that before. So what is your take and what is your advice when it comes to because I think prefix is wonderful the way you describe that. I really like that about the the sort of levels of profit versus ethics and how that there should be a degree of balance and I really I've never heard of that. I

[58:31] love that. But what what would you end the podcast in when it comes to sales in density and how to think about it, how to approach it? >> Well, first of all, sales is it's not a dirty word, but it has dirty connotations in certain places, right? So, the last book that I'll recommend if you've not seen it, which is a brilliant audio book, um Dan Pink to sell as human. Okay, it changed my world in sales because I exited the hospital service as a as a working head and neck cancer going I am never selling to anybody. I'm not a salesman. I I mean so there's a famous story because I'm I'm

[59:02] very good friends with Chris Barrow co Chris coached me for years and um I paid him a lot of money to over 18 months and stuff and he and he transformed our business extraordinarily and was a big big influence on us. But when we were at our early stages, we were in Jaime's Italian restaurant, which is not a thing anymore. And we were having a chat about sales and it was lunchtime and the restaurant behind us went quiet on a moment just at the point where Chris shouted at me, "You think sales is an STD?" Right? And so I have Jazz, I've been on a journey, I promise, understanding that profit is oxygen for

[59:33] my business, right? So use that as your intro by the way. So profit is o profit is oxygen for my business. Get that? It's essential for life, but it's not the meaning of life. I do not wake up in the morning going, "Oh, I'm going to get some oxygen today, but if I don't breathe, I'm dead." Right? So, we need to profit, right? But we don't need profit to be our our dream, our vision, our function. We don't have that, right? But we So, what I want to do if you or any of your family come to see me is I want to be able to try and give you a

[1:00:04] really good solution to your problem if I can. If I can't, I want to be able to tell you that I'm sorry that I can't, but I want to be able to try to find someone who can. That's it. And so, our business, my amazing business has expanded to the fact that we can we can solution manage a lot of scenarios, but not all of them, right? And so, I want you to be able to choose a solution with us or get the option to choose a solution with us. And I never ever want to let you down on service. So if you come to see me and you have a consultation, we will keep talking to

[1:00:34] you until you don't want to talk to us anymore. Not in an obsessive way, not in an angry way, but we'll say to you, do you want to go ahead with treatment? You go, I can't at the moment call him because my son, he wants a new cricket bat and it's going to cost me 50 million quid. So it's going to be about 6 months. We'll go, is it okay if we phone you in 6 months to check in? And if you go, oh, that'd be great. That's the ideal thing. We will never miss that call. >> If you say to us, you know, not just now, Colin, >> we'll never call you again until you come back to us. That's what sales is like, right? Never let people down because you're too busy. Never never break a promise. Never ever contact

[1:01:06] someone who does not want to be contacted. And so if you do that and you count it, if you follow the consultation process that I that I shared with you, right, my conversion rate is still it's about the only thing I've got left in the practice I'm good at is still 80% or above. Right? If you come to me, if your wife fell off her bike tomorrow and she lost her upper central incizer and she has a large smile and that's important to you, it's close to 9,000 for me to replace that tooth, >> right? And my conversion rate is 80%. >> The process works extraordinarily well.

[1:01:38] But um but that's because we're trusted and we've developed trust over 27 years worth of practice in this area. As a Raj Ratan you say trust is something that you you build in like drops or ounces and you can lose in bucket loads in a minute >> in a minute. >> People can't understand they talk about marketing jazz and they can't understand why they can't attract patients because they don't have a brand because they don't know what a brand is. >> Beautiful Colin I thoroughly uh enjoy this part of my duties on the on the podcast is is

[1:02:08] I'll give you some context Colin. I've been doing this podcast since uh like 2018 2019 now. So, we've got um hundreds of hours and whatnot. And it's been absolutely one of my favorite things to do still is having these conversations. The most wonderful conversation we just had, but I have a responsibility that early on in my podcasting career, some people used to message me. It always stuck me stuck with me. And they said like, "Jazz, you you are giving everything away for free." Like on the podcast, everything is being given away for free, right? And these course providers must hate you because you're literally giving away everything free. But actually that that that dentist that

[1:02:41] dentist was wrong because what I found is that actually through Protrusive I have connected dentists and listeners to educators that they really resonated with and they never was on their radar before. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Or um helped them to connect with someone that you know what I like this chap and I think that definitely I think a lot of people will resonated with you. Some people might hate your guts based on your views and comments and that's okay as well. But for those who resonated with you, can you tell us about the Colin, the Campbell Academy, I believe it's called, what you teach, and I'll definitely put the the website and

[1:03:12] everything uh in the link as as as a thank you for giving up your time, but also to as a responsibility I have to help everyone grow because the podcast is one thing and yes, we do CPD, but to be able to grow and do the kind of procedures is important for me to connect them with educators. >> Yeah. So, listen, first of all, when I grow up, I want to be you, right? And so, you are doing extraordinary extraordinary work here and it's a brilliant thing you're doing. never stop, right? And your enthusiasm is fantastic and it's been a it's been a privilege to be asked to be here. I don't need to promote anything. It's just been a privilege to talk to you. Right. >> Thank you.

[1:03:42] >> If you want to find me, we're the Campbell Clinic group, right? The Campbell Clinic is we purpose built a 7,000 square foot uh specialist practice, whatever you call it. We educate, we research, we we teach, we we we our why of our business is we positive we exist to positively influence the life of as many people as possible through the work that we do and the example that we set. If you like that, connect. Go to Campbell Clinic wherever you want on all your stuff or go to the Campbell Academy. The Campbell Academy educates dental business and dental implants and it's and is going

[1:04:12] like a rocket in lots of different places. And all of the chat you get here is what you get when we educate. We chat about this stuff all the time. What you get beyond our education is the philosophy of how to practice and what to do. And and we have a tribe of people who subscribe to that and we have a lot of people who probably hate it. The other place is if you like the conversation, I write a blog. So my podcast is a blog. I have a podcast, but it's it's stalled. But um but I write a blog and and I'm now at 4,250 post. It's been every single day for what, 15

[1:04:43] years? >> And so um >> Well, you've been blogging every single day. >> Yeah. And so if you go to if you if you go to Colin Campbell blog, you'll find it. Hit subscribe, you'll get it. It goes every single day. So there's a business a separate business one. I definitely will be. I'll definitely put that link. That's that's brilliant. And I'll definitely put the link for the academy and all the good work you do. >> But listen, honestly, I knew during the week I was looking forward to talking to you and um and that that was a real privilege. I'm so glad I had the opportunity and thank you so much for your time. >> It means so much me. Thanks so much, CL.

[1:05:15] I appreciate your time and we should do this again sometime. >> Whenever you like. Give me a shout. See you later. Cheers. >> Well, there we have it, guys. I told you it's a saucy one. I told you it's a little bit spicy, controversial. Sorry, but not sorry. I think he just did a brilliant job. Don't you just love Colin? And just before you think this couldn't get any better, you can get CPD for this episode. Answer the quiz, get 80% and you can get CPD. This is available for all our paying subscribers on Protrusive Guidance. And maybe now, if you're not already on the app, it's time to join us and upgrade. Head over

[1:05:45] to protrusive.co.uk/ultimate [music] and unlock CPD that's enjoyable, inspiring, and actually got tons of master classes there as well. Protrusive Education is a PACE approved provider. I'm going to take a moment to thank team Protrusive for all their hard work. And thank you once again, dear listener. You joining me on this podcast just means so much. And if I can just ask you just click that button, hit that subscribe button. Honestly, it would mean a lot. So, please do that. And in doing so, I will catch you same time, same place next week. Bye for now.

[1:06:20] Heat up [music] Hey. Hey. Hey.
