# Communicating Fees, Treatment Plans and More - PS015
videoId: vapDrnVqHRw
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vapDrnVqHRw
duration: 54:47
publishedDate: 2025-04-23
publishedTimeText: 11 months ago

[0:00] If you ask seven dentists, you'll get 12 opinions. You see what I mean? Right? So firstly, okay, you must appreciate that there are so many opinions out there. Every dentist will give a different opinion, which is absolutely mad to just remember. But then remember that when a patient comes to you, they are coming to you. They're seeking your opinion. They've selected you either by geographical convenience or recommendation or whatever. They now ended up in your chair, right? So all you're ever giving them is an opinion. That's it. Okay? Here's a stupid thing, Nav, right? You say to the patient 120 and they're still going to be like, "Oh,

[0:30] 120, that's too much, right?" Yeah. And they didn't even know that was 150. You discounted it. The worst thing you could do is you give a discount, but the patient never knows that you got a discount. That's the worst thing that that's the, you know, that's the stupidest thing ever. Well, I'm with you. Patient communication is one of those things that you just don't get taught at Den School. Like a few other things, again, not their fault. We always talk about it never being the fault of dent school. They just need to make you a safe beginner. But the kind of things we worry about once we qualify is how do we actually make a connection with the patient? How can we communicate

[1:02] fees with a patient and just how do you communicate the patient's options without coercing them into a a particular treatment or trying to be salesy to a patient. These are all things I cover with Nav Batty. Now Emma is doing her finals at the moment. So we wish her all the best. You got this Emma. But I tell you this episode really packs a punch. We talk about body language. We talk about building rapport. We talk about patients that you just won't get along with and how you should manage those and how over time your patients become a reflection of

[1:33] you. And interestingly, we also discuss your money mindset. It's actually important when you're communicating with feaying patients. Hello Patricati. I'm Dez Glatti and welcome back to your favorite dental podcast. This is the student arm, but I tell you these episodes are not just for students, especially this one. anyone who's struggling with communicating fees to patients or anything around being a more effective communicator, I really think you'll gain a lot from this episode. So, make sure you listen all the way to the end. This one is eligible for CPD or CE credits. There's only one place you can

[2:05] get that and that's on Protrusive Guidance. Please do download the app on iOS or Android store, but to actually make an account, the best way to do that is on the website. That's protrusive.app. You can try one of our paid plans and I'm convinced you will love being part of the nicest and geekiest community of dentists in the world. Let's now join Nav who's a dental student in Slovakia as he asked some truly wonderful questions around patient communication. Catch you in the outro. Nav batti today is filling in for protrusive student. Emma is doing her finals as we speak right now. I'm

[2:35] excited to grow this with you as well, my friend. Just remind everyone about yourself, my friend. No worries. I'm trying to fill in forever for now, which is a huge boots to fill. By myself, I'm a fourth year dental student in Slovakia of all places, which is a six-year course. So, I'm not quite at my penultimate year, but uh we're almost there. So, it's going quite well. And if anyone hasn't listened yet, you know, we talked about your journey, right, in a previous episode, and that was really cool. You inspired a lot of people. So please do listen to his backstory how you went from country to country and

[3:06] finally you know you're still a little bit a few years away still but your enthusiasm your passion your drive is amazing. Thank you kind sir. Thank you. A lot of it I must thank sort of protrusive as a whole community. Your podcast it kind of keeps myself colleagues sort of kicking inspires us on a daily basis. I'm not just saying that for the sake of it. It genuinely does to to see so many people out there supporting us on our journey is just amazing. And it's been nice to also see your contributions on the protrusive app. Like you took out some teeth recently. you saw some surgery recently and you're posting about that. So, it's great to have your from your, you know, your student viewpoint. And of course,

[3:37] today probably in the title, this may not even be a protrusive student episode because communication is communication. This is like the biggest thing in densory is far more important than your clinical skills. I'll just say that right off the bat. Far more important than your clinical skills. So, I'm excited to to record this episode with you today and just any questions that you have in this sphere and to take it. So, now take it away, my friend. How can we help? For sure. Sure, I think communication obviously is huge as you quite rightly said, but for some weird reason, it's just never taught at university. You get all this theory, you

[4:07] get all this clinical kind of like workload and they teach you how to do fillings and extractions and whatnot, but they never really get you to communicate with the patient effectively. So, this whole realm I thought who better to ask than yourself uh and kind of drill into it. So, I think to start off as a question, what are the typical dos and don'ts as a top layer with patients when it comes to communication? and then I'd love to ask you more about sort of dental team and dealing with sort of tricky patients but we'll get into it but if you don't mind starting with with that top layer then we can go from there that' be great okay so I have read a fair few books about

[4:40] communication over the years one of the first books I read is like the power of body language or something like that so immediately when you said that the first thing that came to our mind in terms of dos and don'ts so guys like those listening watching me and Nab don't rehearse these questions that I I don't really prepare for I just let them come and we just talk about it in a candid way so automatically The don't I that I think of is you are like typing and your patient's talking, okay? Or even you're writing things, okay? Like, and the patient's talking and your eyes are actually looking at the paper, okay? So then you're like, well, how do I record everything if the patient's talking?

[5:11] Well, we're at an age now. Maybe that was an issue a few years ago. Now we use AI. I use digital TCO. I use DAN to audio record and my nurse as well. Okay, so before it was my nurse, okay, so I would be heavily relying on my nurse kind of being a typist like doing a complete transcript to what the patient says. So I've got a record of everything there if I want to look at it again to like bring all my collect all my thoughts, but I'm really attentively looking at the patient and really making them feel like, hey, this guy really cares. He's listening and don't interrupt. So the automate two don'ts of

[5:42] not to do is don't have your back to them. Don't have your eyes away from them. Keep your eyes to them. Face them, you know, face them front on. And what I also want you to do is make sure you are genuinely an active listener and not really listening to respond because there's some sort of stupid stat whereby a dentist on average will interrupt the patient in the first 5 seconds of them talking. Oh, one thing that I' I've got right which you know you've definitely hit the nail on the head there in terms of interrupting. But I feel as though this is also linked to confidence almost. Now, you know, forgive me if I'm

[6:13] wrong here and correct me if I'm wrong, but I feel as though I probably do it and a lot of my colleagues do it that when we do have the opportunity with a patient, we kind of blurt. And is that a confidence thing? Because we're trying to like collect all of our information, everything that we've been taught and then we're trying to diagnose and we're trying to do everything at once. How do you like put that in the back of your head and just relax and ease and as you said just listen? Because some there's been cases I'll give you an example like there's been plenty of times where a patient will say something and immediately your head as a student says is that irreversible pulpitis or I better start diagnosing it now otherwise I'm going to forget. So then you start

[6:44] asking questions like is it pain on um you know when you get cold stimulus is it pain when you get hot it's like shut up and just let them talk right but how do we as students kind of just ease off because it's so hard to do but what's your best kind of advice for that my advice for you Nav is I think you're being very harsh on yourself right you are literally at a stage now where just like you said you are consciously trying to collect all this information like for someone who's got more experience it just comes naturally because they've done it they've heard the patient a million times talk about this the patient walks in, they know the

[7:14] diagnosis already. Okay. So that is a very different position to where you are where you're actually learning still as you are still conversating with the patient. So it's very tough what you're doing actually because you're trying to make the patient feel listened to but at the same time you're you got these million thoughts in your head and you're trying to figure out wait am I off the mark here? Is this correct? What's the R stand for in Socrates again? Exactly. You're you know what I mean? So you're collecting your thoughts. So you you know don't be so harsh and stuff that's normal and I think that will come with experience. the more you do it, the more

[7:44] slick you become, the more fundamental understanding of densry that you collect, your conversational flow will just come. And so I think I don't think there's a cheat code except you got to do your reps. And so, but the thing is that you're up already because you're actively thinking about that. And the fact that you're already, you know, you've told the universe that you care about communication, you want to become a better communicator in time, you will. I would say that now the best way to do it is maybe jot a few key words down. Okay? because obviously where you are now you're able to access the kind of things I mentioned but write a few key words down but really focus on being

[8:16] attentive listener having said that I said about not interrupting the patient but do you know nav what kind of patients will will blabber and just talk and talk and talk and not give you the dentist a chance do you know what kind of patient that that was genuinely going to be where I was going to segue into because that is the next issue is that if you shut up sometimes they kind of feel as though I got to just keep talking because it's the awkward silence right and it's like who feels it. So, what do you do with that? Well, let's first identify the a telltale sign. Okay. So, when a patient is doing that

[8:46] and they're they've said their bit, but they're just going on and on and on and on. That is a classic sign of something. Okay. Can you think of what have you experienced this? I'm going to say, is it anxiety? Maybe absolutely nailed it. It's anxiety. They're nervous and they do that. So, I've seen this time and time again. So if you recognize that then sometimes what these patients what they're really craving for not telling you is that hey I feel listened to but can you just like take hold of me and just direct me. Okay. So for most people who aren't nervous I mean it's normal to be nervous a little bit at the dentist right but for for those who have manageable anxiety then what I

[9:18] recommended first is good. Let them speak and then have your thing. So ask open-ended questions first and then narrow in on closed questions. Okay. So questions that have you're looking for a yes or no that's closed but how was your journey today is an open question. Okay, tell me more about your toothache. Okay, that's an open question. Whereas, is it the top left one that hurts is a yes? Is a closed question, right? So, you want to narrow it down so later in the conversation you as you're starting to nail your diagnosis and they've given you enough information to feed on. But if they're just going in a waver direction and they're lacking structure and they're kind of crying out for help

[9:49] and so sometimes depending on your rapport with a patient and how you feel this will go is is sometimes saying, "Hey patient, by the way, look, I'm going to just help to direct this conversation cuz I think we're really close now and I'm going to help you just remind them. I'm going to help you, but I just say patient, are you how are you feeling? Are you are you nervous about being here today? And then sometimes they kind of like yes, I am nervous. And they had the opportunity to just, you know, let you know about them and then what they're craving from you at that point and say, hey, don't worry. Me and my nurse are really going to look after you. We're going to be really kind to you and then direct them. I think that's

[10:19] a really nice touch to to add to nervous patients. Okay. And let me flip this for you. What about those that don't talk enough? How are you going to get that vital information extracted out of them? Because I'll tell you now, I've had that issue before. People just don't want to tell you anything. I sometimes look at them and think, are they just scared to talk to me cuz they don't want me to work on them? But surely you probably come across the opposite end. So, how do you deal with kind of extracting information when you need it? Listen, if the patient is not saying much, but they're saying what the few words they're saying. They're very impactful and you're able to know your diagnosis and you have enough and some people just

[10:50] aren't very talkative, right? And that's okay. And that's their personality type. Maybe they're a quieter individual. Maybe they're introvert and that's okay. But if you are still not getting enough, you then just need to probe more and sometimes just give the silence and then raise your eyebrows and and nod and invite them. Okay? And repeat back what they said. So you said this, but can you just please expand more on this cuz I I just need more information about that to get my diagnosis so that I can help you. So keep waving the carrot. You know, I'm going to help you. Okay. So that I can help you. Okay. I just want more information. Can you tell me more about

[11:22] this? So you're still keeping it open-ended. Tell me more about this. But then eventually you can narrow into close-ended questions. Okay. I love this idea of like the filter of start open and then just get to your target point. That's awesome. I'm going to actually start using that a lot. So thank you for that. More so with my colleagues and myself as I'm talking as a group almost but we are as a group coming across a lot of patients that are beginning to what we think and this is assumption not telling us the whole truth right and we don't know why. we kind of have conversed with each other and said is it

[11:52] because they're scared because they don't want a certain treatment. Do you come across this? Is this like a common thing that people are not telling you the whole truth cuz maybe they don't want, you know, an injection or they don't want a filling done. They're just trying to lie to us to get out of the chair. How do you overcome that? Maybe clinically you've noticed there's something blatantly obvious, but then they're like, "No, no, no. It's not painful. It's absolutely fine." But they're flinching on percussion, let's say, for example. How do you deal with that? Yeah, that's a tough one. At the same time, you know, you want to be respectful to the patient and you don't want to disrespect them by saying, "Hey, you know, you're you're not being uh

[12:23] true." But as House MD said, you know, patients lie. Okay? So, it's a fact of life and you have to kind of dig deeper into, okay, what what do we think? What do we and assumptions are not good? Okay, assumptions are not good. But sometimes if we generally think the the patient's having us on here, we want to find out what could be their motive. Okay? And I think if you encounter that scenario, be like like let's say you tap a tooth, okay, and the patient's flinch, but they're saying no, no, it doesn't hurt, okay? Be like, well, patient, you know what? I'm just really worried for you because I the signs you're not telling me that it's hurting, but it

[12:54] looks as though it should be really painful and so that can help you. Can you just really confirm that are you sure that wasn't even a little bit? So sometimes you want to just encourage them a little bit and explain. So a big theme of what I want to discuss with you now today is one of my things which there's I mean most things that I've learned in communication are always learned either from books or from colleagues or shadowing people. But this one I believe I probably got from Zach Car and it's show you're working out. Okay. And I just love this so much. Okay. Cuz anytime I'm giving options to my patients or anything I'm explaining I

[13:25] give them like the background how I arrived at this question, how I arrived at this conclusion. There's a famous study in psychology whereby there's a long queue back in the days when they used to be photocopers, right? There was a long queue and these students were waiting to photocopy something, right? I think it might have been a Harvard study, right? From from memory. Anyway, so imagine there's a long queue, okay? And then you've got something in your hand that you want to photocopy. Now imagine you go right to the front of the queue, okay? You tap on the person who's photocopying right now or or the next person actually, and you say, "Hey, can

[13:56] I please go in front of you?" Okay? And if you say that, you'll be amazed that a significantly higher percentage of people actually surprisingly said, "Okay, fine." And they did it. Okay, but it wasn't like really really high. Okay, but then if you say, "Can I go in front of you because I need to photocopy?" Now, obviously you need to photocopy. You got a paper in your hand and you're going approaching a photocopier. But just by giving them a Y, it shot up like 93%. Like it significantly made a difference in terms of the person letting you, you know, skip the queue. And so this psychological experiment,

[14:27] what it teaches us is, you know, don't just tell if you actually give them a why, that actually matters a lot more. And that's kind of the basis of show you're working out. So for example, like telling someone that they benefit from a root canal, potentially to save their tooth, like, hey, I think for you, I think to save the tooth with a root canal is probably the best idea. I know it's going to take more time. I know it costs more, but the reason I came to this conclusion that if you lose this tooth, you won't have a bite on the left side anymore and then you'll be you chewing only on the right side and over time that can cause it own issues. For

[14:58] that reason, I think we should do this rather than hm I think I like to save teeth. Let's do a root canal. You're just giving them a more context and sometimes you you try and speak their language. Yeah, I love that. I love that. I think that is the you know something I do want to ask you is about terminology and if you don't mind just before I ask you that kind of bringing it back a bit when it comes to almost offering treatments I love this idea of like giving the why but is there like a fine line almost between doing that and almost pushing and encouraging people to

[15:29] take a certain treatment option because apparently that's like a big no no right like we shouldn't kind of just say you should do this but you also have this option how do you manage the wording for that especially when comes down to being a professional dentist and then you've got, you know, so many legal issues involved. How do you word things correctly when you are giving options, but then obviously in your head, you probably know what the best option should be for the patient. How do you present that? That's a million-dollar question. I love that because that's something I've really tackled with and a big confusion area for me and I think I've gained a lot of clarity over the years through experience and speaking to

[15:59] mentors and great people in communication. And I think we all need to remember, okay, that anything. So firstly let's all remember whenever you post an image on protrusive community or anywhere you post it right I mean I know that actually the agreement rate in protrusive is pretty high amongst each other okay but even now they you know we'll disagree with each other respectfully what I like about our community is that we're very respectful we're disagreeing with each other right but you ask a dentist an opinion right and you you know if you ask seven dentists you'll get 12 opinions you see what I mean right so firstly okay we

[16:29] must appreciate that there are so many opinions out there every dentist will give a different opinion which absolutely mad to just remember. But then remember that when a patient comes to you, they are coming to you. They're seeking your opinion. They've selected you either by geographical convenience or recommendation or whatever. They now ended up in your chair, right? So all you're ever giving them is an opinion. That's it. Okay? And so remember, I know we're very international. People all over the world listen to this podcast, but our standards that we follow in the UK and I'm sure and and we're one of the strictest regulators in the world,

[17:00] right, GDC. So if it satisfies us, it probably satisfies where you are in your country, which is we are allowed and we should make a recommendation. It actually says in the standards, you know, you should make a recommendation. And so we're allowed to make a recommendation. So you're not saying anything wrong. You're not coercing the patient. You're not persuading them down a certain way by making a recommendation. But really, the question really is the recommendation that we're making, is it on a sound basis? And it should not be for profit. It should not be for your gain. It should genuinely be in the patient's best interest. So, if

[17:31] you've got five different options to treat a problem, okay, and you're not sure which one to recommend, that just means one thing. And that one thing that means that you haven't asked the patient enough questions. For example, you should ask patient, you know, would you like something removable or would you like something fixed? Okay, it's like playing guess who. You know that game guess who, right? Once you've asked enough questions, there's like two dudes who could be that's it, right? And then like, okay, well, is this option or that option? because you told me already that you want something removable because the idea of a fix and you want something that's going to be on this budget and you want something as quick as possible

[18:02] based on that it's either going to be do nothing or a denture. Okay, but because of the fact that you told me that you like to choose steak, I think based on that I would recommend the denture. It would cost this much. It would involve disappointments. The other option is to do nothing but then by doing that option this is the disadvantages basically. And so I think that's a very simple way to do it. Once you've figured out what the patient's goals are by asking lots of good questions, it's just like guess who. You kind of know what to recommend and you are allowed to recommend. Yes, you should give the other options including do nothing but it's totally

[18:34] fine to recommend and I think make peace with that and all yours is is an opinion and that's okay. I love that. Okay. So long as that's the case, that's great. And I mean you know one thing that you mentioned there is obviously about questioning and I think you know that is the way that we're going to get down to everything. But where's the sweet spot? Or is this also an experience thing? Because surely, you know, I'm guessing that you've seen this from newly qualified dentists or even students like myself. We probably babble a lot and we probably ask a million questions and bore the patient or we ask for too much. What's kind of the sweet spot? And I'm guessing is it only learned through experience or is there any kind of tips that you can give us there as always is

[19:05] to not overdo it. I think experience is a huge one and your environment actually matters as well. And what I mean by that is when I started my career like most dentists in the UK, I was in NHS practice, right? And so some days I'd see, you know, 26 35 patients in a day, okay? And now I see like one patient if it's a whole day treatment or like eight patients or 12 patients. Do you see what I mean? It's a different flow. And so you have to become very efficient in that practice in an NHS practice. I'm not saying that that's the best way or the worst way. I'm not saying either of those things. It's just the way it is

[19:36] because you are catching targets. You're in a publicly funded environment. Okay? And that's how it is. And so that makes you think fast. that makes you be like, "Okay, well, here's the problem. Here's my differential diagnosis. I've nailed my diagnosis. Therefore, the option this you become very slick at doing that, right?" And so being in that environment accelerates it. And then the difference now is I use those same skills, but I really work on building a rapport with a patient so that they, you know, you they really feel listened to and I get to actually talk them through their radioraph. I get to show them the

[20:06] intraoral camera photos and you know on once they have that done they're just amazed because most colleagues they've seen before may have not done that and therefore they come to you and they're never going to want to see anyone else ever again because the way that you explained it the way how patient you were how open you were to welcoming questions and and the clarity in which you explained those options in their own language without using jargon was something that they're always going to remember. So it comes with experience in a way. So that's the honest answer. comes experience but you you get experience in working in both those environments a fast pace and a slower

[20:36] pace and then sometimes you just use skills from either one. Okay. So definitely experience it seems like quite a lot of this is experience-based and uh so at least it's putting me in a good frame of mind that I'm not just completely failing at this stage and there's now I'm like let's see I'm am I 12 years qualified now right which is still a baby right in terms of long career that we have okay so I take advice and I take the experience and mentorship from those who've been in the game for 30 years right and what they've all told me is that over time maybe it's the gray hairs or whatever but like

[21:07] getting patients to agree to treatment ments. Okay. And I say that in a way not for profit, not for you know case acceptance and and grossing and that kind of stuff. I say it in a way that when you recommend a treatment for their benefit, for their health, right, that the patient actually values their health and goes ahead with it because that's the best thing for them. So that kind of frame the dentists have say that either it's because they've seen their patient for so many years or just the way that the dentist now says it, right? When the dentist has so much experience, honestly, you don't care if the patient says yes or no. It doesn't matter,

[21:38] right? if you eat tonight or not will not depend on that. Okay? And when you're not desperate for it and you're literally just there, you know, as an adviser to the patient, okay? And you're like, "What would you like to do? It's over to you. How can I help you?" Okay? When you come with that frame over time and get those gray hairs and you get the experience and you've been there before and I think patients can smell the confidence, okay? And so, a lot of it will come from time. Maybe it's cuz, you know, one of the reasons I don't dye my beard yet is cuz I like the gray hairs. It shows I got experience. And so maybe it's just they all tell me that that maybe it's with experience that you know

[22:08] they don't have to try as hard. Patients actually just want to do everything you say because of you just having more experience. Okay. You said their patients can smell the confidence on the other end of the stick. Can they actually smell the BS as well? And the reason I ask you that there's two types of people, right? There's two types of let's say dentists for the sake of it. There's those that have one personality and they're true to themselves and they do it with everyone. And there's the chameleon, right? that's doing a bit of everything because they're seeing the patient and they're adjusting according to. What's your advice on that? Because again, patients aren't thick, right? And

[22:40] they can figure things out. So, how do you approach that? What would what would be your advice around kind of personality and how to kind of exude that in a way that isn't BS basically? Again, you asked some amazing questions. I'm going to say be a modified chameleon. Okay. What I mean by limited chameleon is because I value individuality. So I did a Tom Ras Stre strengthfinder book years ago and one of my five strengths is individ individuality. So one of my core strengths is individuality. Meaning that I treat the individual as an individual. There's no I know there's protocols and

[23:11] stuff that we apply to everyone but if someone if a teenager comes or if if a kid comes I'm going to talk about that kind of stuff and I become a big kid and stuff and it's very easy very fluid for me to do that. Right? And then when the sweet old lady comes I change I adapt very easily. Right? So I think it's good to be the chameleon. Okay. and good to and when that engineer comes okay you talk like an engineer and you you put a different frame on you put a different mask on right and I think the other topic that's just very related before we cover this in a bigger way but very related to this is the fact that we are

[23:41] in theater not the medical theater we are in showmanship we are in Hollywood baby okay what I mean by that is when you have a tough day and your kids are not having their breakfast and you had maybe a tiff with your wife and then you're going to work whatnot and you you woke up on the wrong side of bed and last night there was an issue at home whatever you have to forget everything you put on this mask okay when you put on those gloves the lights are on makeup camera action at that moment in time the patient must feel that they are the only person in the world that's how important

[24:13] that you need to make them feel I need to forget everything cuz we owe that to our patients okay so there is a degree of showmanship and turning up and putting on a performance okay and some people don't like to hear that but this is what I've been taught by one of my first principles Dr. Hapgill and I think it's true. I think what we do is performance and just like performers when you act you act a different role according to the movie. All right? And the movie will be different every time and the script is different every time. Okay? You are still the same person. You still have your mannerisms. You still have your I'm not saying change yourself. You're yourself but you're being this modified chameleon to blend

[24:45] to the scenario to blend to the individual. Now the reason I mentioned the word modified is that because you need to draw a line in the sand and set some standards. What I mean with that is I've decided a long time ago, right, that if any patient, right, is rude or just not a nice person or you know what, that we're really not seeing eye to eye and we're clashing. Okay, thankfully it doesn't happen very often, but there are some patients that it can happen to, right? Hey, I've got some funny stories I can tell you perhaps later. But you know the other way to think about this, it's a long way of saying it, but when

[25:15] you look at your career and then let's say you have been in one practice for several years, you'll notice that you attract patients that are similar to you, right? So my patients are the ones that don't gel with you, they'll go somewhere else eventually, okay? Or see the other dentist, okay? My patients are bubbly. My patients are talkative and they're very much like representative of me. And that happens over time. you'll notice and actually that's a sign of you're doing something well and that's a sign of happiness. there's less, you know, you get along with your patients. It's a jelling that you have basically. And so, the reason I mentioned that and

[25:46] going back to I decided a long time ago, there are certain type of patients that, you know, uh, I still have a duty of care to them and I'll still make sure they're out of pain and stuff, but if I'm doing any elective treatment, right? If I'm doing a smile makeover, if I'm doing any orthodontics, if I'm doing a fullmouth rehab, I'm doing a toothware case, okay? I'm not going to touch that, okay? I'm going to say, "Look, maybe it's better you see someone else for this kind of work, right?" Hello YouTube Patrusi. I know you're watching on YouTube and I hope you're enjoying this episode so far, but I wanted to highlight in case you don't know yet, we have an amazing viewing experience on

[26:16] protrusive.app, our website, our network, our platform. So, I just want to spend a minute to show you what this looks like. On the left side, you see the navigation and when you join the app, you get a 1 minute video tour of the entire network. Now, in terms of where the magic happens, that's in the protrusive community. Cuz you might come for the content, but you'll stay for the community of the nicest and geekiest dentists in the world. We have all these polls. We have a chat group. There's always active chats and dentists helping dentists. And really, what I wanted to do is create a really supportive

[26:47] environment that's not like the environment we have on Facebook. And it's built on the values of niceness and geekiness. If you are nice and geeky, you belong here. Now, to make this a safe space, we have a manual process of approval. We actually verify that you are a dental professional before you get in here. So, we have hundreds of applicants a day. So, if it's been about 2 days and you haven't heard anything, either something's in your junk or you need to reach out. If you're still waiting to join your tribe, email marie at protrusive.co.uk. That's m a r i

[27:19] protrusive.co.uk and she'll investigate what's happened. Now, all the videos you have on YouTube are also on here, but you actually have some extra ones for free that you don't have on YouTube. So, you get some bonus content that's not on YouTube. And actually, for the future, I'm not taking things out of YouTube, but some things are not appropriate for the wider public. And I want to sort of safeguard that information, which is like dentist talk, if you like. So, that's why a lot of the content is only here and not on YouTube. So, you're kind of missing out if you're not on here. That's why I'd love for you to join there. And if you join one of our paid plans, then what you get is access to

[27:50] the CE quiz like this one and you can get CPD or CE certificates and also you get our premium notes. So these are a great aid memoir or revision for an episode to really cement your learning. And whilst we have ads and YouTube places ads on YouTube, we don't have that on our network. So for the paid plan, you get to see all of the premium notes without any of the ads. And of course, you get to support team Protrusive and help us to continue what we're doing. I'm just going to gloss over the protrusive vault which has all our infographics and downloadables. These are all our master classes at this

[28:21] moment in time and we're always planning to add more. And if you look at there's about 1 2 3 about seven of them. But actually if you look at the replay section some of the live master classes that I've done and some of the training that people pay for on other websites is all on there included as part of the masterclass subscription. And if you're a student, don't fear. We have a special section for you with all the student notes which anyone can access. So for example, here is one on Exodia. So, it's all there waiting for you on Protrusive Guidance. Please head over to the website which is protrusive.app. Make an account on your

[28:51] browser. This could be Safari, Chrome, however you want to do it. And once you've made your login, then you can download the iOS or Android app and then log in through there. So, the reason to make the subscription primarily on the website first is that you get access to the free trial, which you don't get if you make an account on Android, iOS. If you make it on the website, you get access to the free trial and you get our best price if you sign up through protrusive.app. So, our best deals and free trials are only on protrusive.app. Of course, we always put the link below in the description. And thank you so much for enjoying our videos on YouTube,

[29:23] but it's now finally time to level up your experience. Back to the episode. I'd rather see the patients, okay, that we truly have a connection, okay? Because if we don't have a connection, I'll get them out of pain. I'll still be courteous and respectful them. But if I generally do not think that we will gel together okay there are someone else that will do your work but they'll gel much better with that patient with that dentist sorry and so you know there is teamwork there are other dentists out there with who will gel better with other patients and let let the universe find that solution for them I like that and then and then obviously you mentioned there about rude patients and

[29:54] then you don't try to distance yourself from them as students especially when we're you know we're yesmen let's be fair right we we're not we don't really have the power to tell people to like do want to go to another practice how do we deal with it because we're not ever seen as as dentists, right? We're seen as understudies and maybe we don't get as much respect as fully qualified practitioners. What advice would you give to to students in my position that might come across a tough day where somebody's not respecting us, treating us like like doormats? How do we kind of put that professionalism back into that workplace between patient and dentist

[30:25] and then not let it affect us mentally? Cuz let's be fair, we are probably the most fragile creatures, right? when we're when we're students because any critique and suddenly we're like oh we're in the wrong profession we're not good enough yada yada how do we deal with uh with with difficult patients what would be your kind of communication tips for that I mean that's brought so many thoughts to our mind the first thought is they say that when you go on a first date with someone right and you're in a restaurant okay you look at how they treat the waiter right before you think about okay should I go on a second date should we eventually become in a binding relationship with someone

[30:57] you look at how they treat a stranger look at how they treat other people that tells you a a lot about them, right? And so in a similar vein, some of my receptions will tell me that jazz the patients are so lovely to you, but when they come out to us, they're really rude to us and that's important information because that's not nice. I mean, if you if your values are that such that you know that everyone deserves to be treated nicely, then that you know, you need to record that in your mind and just be be mindful of that cuz sometimes patients can turn. So for me, like niceness is a heritive value. You know, one of the reasons I market Protrusive Guidance as the home of the nicest and geekiest dentist in the world is cuz I

[31:28] genuinely believe that, you know, if you're there just to for the free downloads and and you're not actually want to contri not be nice to another, then you know, you're not you don't belong and protrusive, right? I actually want a collection of just the loveliest humans, humans first then dentists. So, I believe in that and I and I truly hold that. Right? However, having said that, to answer your question, you as a student, right? Sometimes they'll be rude to you but ever so nice to the professor, to the tutor. And you, I'm sure you you experience this, okay? And that tells you a lot. But in your scenario, you've got to get through it. You know, you got to suck it up, buttercup, be respectful, be courteous,

[31:59] you've got to get through your dent school training, right? But when you come out in the real world, if you come across patients who are rude to you or rude to your staff, you need to have a policy and a protocol in place. Okay? So again, we have a duty of care to these patients, okay? and we will get them out of pain and we will speak nicely to them and best we can but you have to think twice whether you really want to make this patient you know are you seeing eye to eye have you got enough rapport because you need rapport because not you know we don't have 100% success rates if you tell a patient that there's a deep filling and there's a crack in your tooth you didn't put the carries there

[32:30] you didn't put a crack in the tooth the patient came with that if they don't own that right and they'll be quick to blame you the dentist okay do you really want to treat that kind of patient you want to take that patient on not really so you need to make sure that you see eye to eye with that patient. Okay? And then over time, you'll find that if you adopt this mentality, you will genuinely attract the kind of patients that are that share the same values of you as you. Your patients become a reflection of you. I love that. I absolutely love that. I think that's kind of connects with what you said before about, you know, over time you're going to just have people that are so pretty much you

[33:01] versions of agents and over time you're just going to build that kind of client base or patient base, whatever you want to call it. I'm looking forward to that. I'm looking forward to just seeing loads of navs eventually. That'll be that'll be quite fun. There'll be different forms of navs, you know, old lady with a with a slight navism, whatnot. And and then there's patients that, you know, they don't genuinely feel that connection and it'll be the feeling will be mutual. You don't have a connection. And I'm very much coming it through a lens of, you know, general densry is really fascinating. Like you go to your doctor, you go to your GP when there's a problem. Okay? And every time I go to a GP, I'm seeing someone else, right? We

[33:31] in densry are such a unique and beautiful position, right? Like one of the therapists, hygiene therapists retired recently, right? and she's been seeing one of my patient I've been seeing this patient for 5 years but she was seeing that therapist for 30 years and on the last day they both shed a tear they both cried okay why they cry because she and I asked her you know tell me more about that right and she said well you know she was there when I gave birth to my first child she was there when this happened you know she's been a constant in my life and now she's going you know and we actually you know if we choose to go into general

[34:01] dentistry family dentistry and be a practice which most of us will do we cannot honestly underestimate the power of this you to build a relationship in densry is so so powerful. And when you connect with the patient, right, and you have that lovely rapport, they will follow you around. Okay? And that's the best kind of scenario, right? And the patients that you don't gel with, you're still going to be respectful. You're still going to care for them, but you'll find that eventually there'll be what we call an attrition rate. As soon as they have to move a mile down the road, they won't come back to you. And that's probably for the best. That's probably for the best, right? They only came to

[34:32] you because of geographical convenience, and that's all. And that's okay. Okay? You were there to serve them and help them. But the kind of patient that you genuinely have a connection with. So that's why I mean over time you will find that the patients that you've held and retain are such a great reflection. And so many dentists tell me that they love their job and they love it more now more than ever before now that I've been in one practice for 20 years cuz it genuinely feels like a chat. They genuely feel a patient's coming in for a chat and when something goes wrong like a tooth large filling that happened 18 years ago now breaks down and you say to

[35:02] the patient, "Okay, oh well I can help you. This will be a post crown. we can do that this how much it's going to cost and the trust is there and they'll be like yeah sure when can we book in because the trust is the currency that we deal with not not economical it's all about trust I love it this is just sounding like a barber shop to me now it's like you know the going in there like almost I don't know I would never know I've never been in a barber shop you're missing out on where all the guys get together and have their secrets but you know I like this idea this concept I think that longevity within our career you know it's rewarding more than just from a financial aspect but there's so

[35:34] much big kind of interpersonal ity within there as well. That's amazing. I mean, going back a few steps and and kind of trying to to weave this together, so to speak. You spoke about language, right, which is super important. Students make this mistake all the time. We speak to our patients as though they know everything that we read, right? So, we we're talking to them about, oh, you might have a periapical lesion here. You know, we did this and y and you you need x, y, and zed. And they're just sort of sitting there like, what the hell are you talking about? Right? It's very easy to do that as students. Is this something that you see progressing into dentists

[36:05] that have qualified and they still do it and what would be your advice to I don't want to use the word dumb it down because we're not trying to say our patients are dumb but how do we almost normalize the vocabulary with patients. What's your advice for that? Yeah, great question and the answer is yes. There's jargon everywhere in dentistry and I've seen some really qualified dentists like you know 20 25 years out and then the way they're talking to the patients like they're literally like I saw a proontist look at a patient in the eye and tell the patient that in lateral excursion when you go to the left this these teeth

[36:35] are touching like there's only a very niche engineer type of patient that will understand what that means and actually the ramifications of it right a lot of dentists might not even understand so like I've seen this happen right and they're literally saying like you have a periapical infection and even just like I know perod dentist perodontist right at uni and he said to a patient and is this contemporaneous with what your dentist said and so I'm not saying dumb it down but like is that really you know appropriate so if you feel as though the patient has that level of language and you you've sus that out then absolutely

[37:05] cuz I'm a big believer in that modified comedian and therefore you you know I'm going to speak like this in it if I see someone yeah who's from the street I'm like bro listen yeah your tooth needs to come out and I must and very much I got that right and that's fine okay and then they respect me a lot and We get it. Okay. Okay. I don't actually do it in that extremity. I was a bit of a dramatic effect there, but I'm very much like, you know, if the patient wants to fist bump me, I'm going to fist bump them. Right. So, you got to really meet them where they are. And the best person I saw do this was Raj Patel in Sheffield. Like when he saw a patient who was a gardener, right? He would

[37:36] literally describe just like that. Such a wonderful way. He would describe everything that he was doing in densry like in gardening terms. If you had a builder or a plumber, he like it it was the most magical thing ever. And I learned a lot that day seeing that, right? So try and speak to a patient on their own terms, right? So for example, if you have a teenage girl, right, which was a real world scenario, teenage girl, good-looking teenage girl, and she was thinking that she had an ectopic canine and she said, "Oh, you know what? I don't want braces. I'd rather have it out and I'm accepting of this." And then

[38:06] he really spoke her language and said, "Look, you know, fair enough. it doesn't bother you now, but when you're 30, when you're 40, you know, think about your long-term future and when you smile and your I think forgot what you said now, wedding day or whatever, like try and just let help them see the long-term connection and and about their friends and stuff and bringing it all in. And the way he spoke to her was like, "Yeah, you know what?" And she was there with her dad that day and she was like, "Yeah, you know what? You're right. I think I should get the braces. I think that's the best for me." And he made her realize that by really connecting with her. And so when you connect in the patient's own language and when you connect with someone's own language then

[38:37] it's easy to actually avoid periapical pathology. It's like look you see this black thing over here to some person to most people I say that's infection. Okay. To the guy off the street I might say listen yeah that is mush. That is mush in there. Trust me you you want that out. Okay. And they are very receptive. Okay. So this is going back to this modified communion thing over and over. I feel like this is the theme. So, I'm going to definitely have to take this in and just adjust depending on the patient. This is amazing information. Thank you very much. My kind of future question, cuz obviously we're not there

[39:08] yet. Might be a great way to wrap up. Up to you. But finances, payment, how the hell do you do it? Like, I find it weird to ask my mate for that Fiverr back, right? How do you go and speak to strangers and say, "This is the the treatment options that you got available and it's going to cost your ex." I don't know how you do it. Do you do it at the beginning? Do you do it at the end? Do you get someone else to do it for you? like do you have a card reader in the surgery and you say pay up now or do you do you send them away? Do you explain because this I think we all have sleepless nights as students thinking about this. So please do enlighten us.

[39:38] I'm laughing here because literally like everyone like this theme has been a big one throughout my career and I'm at a comfortable place now with my fees and stuff and I can I'll tell you how I do it now but over the time I tried every method like I I tried this method whereby cuz I hate to talk about fees as well. So I'll be like okay you know Zoe will tell you the fees and I just look away and Zoe would like okay so you and she'll do the work and some people have you know treatment coordinators then so they never have to worry about talking about fees okay and so for me I think it's a bigger thing here right and a lot of this Lincoln Harris inspired me and some of this my own little masala here

[40:08] as well which is it's a money mindset thing okay I come to refugee from Afghanistan money is not something that was very prevalent growing up and then coming into dentistry where you know me even me coming in right and I my parents would never spend the amount I I you know I would then be even then be charging for restoration. my parents wouldn't have that kind of money, right? And and so knowing that and knowing, you know, the kind of it's it's like the relationship you have with your parents and how their money mindset goes into you. And for me, I remember and I talked about this in another podcast episode,

[40:39] right? A really really sad but funny thing. A patient who was also a refugee actually. So this patient's refugee, okay? And I'm obviously I came in when I was 6 years old and this patient came from Afghanistan like a few years ago, right? And then I took his tooth out and then he asked me, "How much does it cost to replace something here?" And I went through all the options and okay, how much is an implant? I said, "Well, it's uh, you know, about £2,500 at that point." I said, "Right, probably more than that." Obviously, now it's definitely more than that, but okay. And even then, I remember saying it a little bit like, "Yeah, it's it's quite a lot of money, you know." That's how I said it. And he literally just started to

[41:10] laugh. He literally started to laugh like not not like in a rude way, but in a genuine tickling like hysterics. Like, that's hilarious. But are you kidding me? That's that's hilarious. It it can't cost that much. Like, it was that kind of laughter, right? You know what I did? I started laughing with him and even I was like okay and so that was like when I was like in my DF one year one year qualified right and so I had a huge money mindset issue okay because you know I didn't have money in my life and therefore it was difficult for me to talk about money with my patients okay when that kind you know the kind of

[41:41] treatment plan to do a post crown and this denture was way more than what was in my current account at that point and so there was a money mindset issue and and I think that's normal to have that if you don't come a place of money I think it's normal to have that and so over the years it's not just that because I accumulated more money and had more income. It's genuinely I worked my money mindset and I really, you know, read some things and really money is a flow of energy. Okay? And when you become grateful of every time you see money leave your bank account, you know, you need to look up and say thank you. Thank you for allowing me in a position

[42:11] that I can pay for something. Okay? And then when money comes in, be like again look at the universe say thank you. Okay? Money is just flowing in. Money is flowing out. Money is just energy and that's all it is. And so when you then realize that actually you are totally worth it. You are totally worth it. Okay? Because you can go to a fancy place and there could be a wardrobe, okay, a bloody small wardrobe for £40,000. And people will buy it and they produce it and people will buy it. Okay? And then when you realize that actually we

[42:41] are not in the money business. We are in a the value. It's the value that you can bring to someone. Okay? What we're selling is health. We're selling health and longevity. If someone can chew better and digest better, we want you to realize that we are in the health space and there's nothing more valuable than that. Now, there are some patients who genuinely cannot afford your fees and that's okay. So, when they say no, don't take it personally, okay? If someone genuinely cannot afford it, okay, then that's fine. Now, just because someone has got £50,000 their bank account, don't think that they're going to take your £2,000 treatment plan, don't think

[43:12] that it's it's a no-brainer for them because they may not value it. So either you haven't communicated the value or genuinely the patient will you know has a value issue basically and so the top tip I give here is fix your own money mindset issue cuz that's a big part of it okay once you fix your money mindset issue it becomes easier to talk to and then I tried all those various ways never was comfortable talking money but once you overcome your money mindset issues and then I had an experience whereby the patient went down and they felt as though I didn't communicate the fees properly okay and if a fee is a surprise to a patient then that's not good either okay so now I'm in a place

[43:44] now where I'm very open and honest and and very direct with my fees like okay so that we can get this done the total fee will be you know £4,500 okay and I say it very confidently I don't look away I don't blink I say it very confidently and sometimes what worked for me in the past as well and papsaire it's worth mentioning cuz it might help someone is one of our values in this practice is to be transparent in our fees the total fee for everything is £4,500 this will include all your appointments the lab work and by the time you come to the end of it you will have paid that amount and you'll get

[44:14] this work done basically. And so just to clar so that we are transparent with our fees. This is how much it costs. This is what it includes. Is this something that you like to go ahead with or do you have any questions? That kind of stuff. Ah, I like this. I like this. I think the money mindset is is huge as well. It's how we perceive things. So this is all going in. I'm going have to probably do some roleplay with a few few of my mates. Yes. Nav, you're so right. Role play is really really important. Okay. And wow. So I'm listening to a book at the moment called Psych Psychocybernetics. It's from like the 1950s. is like the godfather of self-help books, right? And so it gave

[44:46] birth to the sort of self-help era basically the Tony Robbins of the world etc. And really what it talks about is the power of roleplay and power of imagining yourself. So if you now if you imagine yourself right being in the clinic looking confident being kind and courteous to your patient and with a smile will be able to say well actually it's going to cost this amount and the patient saying thank you so much I can't wait to get started. Okay. And that visualization and then role playing in your head. Because here's a fascinating thing, right? The brain, your brain does not know what is real and what is

[45:17] imagined. So if you literally imagine yourself in a dark room, okay, and all like you see ghosts and stuff, right? And you'll start to sweat. You'll actually like start a terrible terrible example. It's just the first thing to my head, right? But like like your nervous system will actually put a depending on how vivid your imagination is um and how big your fear is, you'll start to sweat. you'll have a palpitation. Your brain does not know if that was real or that was fake. So the other thing is like for example there was another experiment whereby these people do like you know free throws in basketball right they try

[45:47] and get the free throws in right so group one does free throw training every single day. So for 21 days every single day they will practice okay every single day okay then group two only practices on day one okay and then they get tested at day 21. So group one practices every single day and then their test is on day 21. Group two only practices on day one and then they get tested on day 21. Between day two and day 20, they did no practice. And group three, here's a fascinating one, right? They practice on day one. They do a test on day 21, but

[46:18] in between, they don't actually practice for real. They practice in their brain. They imagine practicing. Okay. Now, the worst group was the one that didn't practice at all. Yeah. The best group was the one that practiced every day, but only by like a whisker. Because the group that imagined getting the ball in, right, they were literally only a whisker behind, okay, and they were significantly better than the group that didn't practice. And so what this experiment shows us, athletes do this all the time, the power of visualization. Every time I have to give a lecture somewhere, okay, like recently I was teaching in Norway, full day like

[46:49] half day lecture. I was a little bit nervous, but I literally use the power of visualization. What's my face going to look like? How I'm going to be dressed? How am I going to deliver this piece of content? And that really helps me a lot. And so going back to your point, when if anyone's struggling discussing fees, the power of visualization, the power of role playing even, you don't actually need to really do role play. You can role play in your mind. You don't need a mirror. Just we can do a mirror, but classically do, but if you imagine you doing this and you imagine yourself communicating in the way that you would like to portray

[47:20] yourself, then that's going to happen. Oh, I love that. Do you know when you were saying all that, I just remember something from ages ago. I'm pretty sure David Beckham used this because it was once on a documentary or something and they were mentioning that he does a lot of visualization and he just athletes are reowned for the top athletes all say in golf in various sports and top athletes they do this they visualize exactly what they're trying to do and the brain doesn't know if it's real or fake the brain is actually figuring out even there was an experiment whereby the people are lifting weights okay and then people just imagine like vividly imagine

[47:51] lifting the weights and they actually got stronger and they're a they're able to do Yes, they actually got stronger. Okay, this is a real thing. They actually gained muscle mass. There's a limit to that obviously, but it's just fascinating to see that actually compared to doing nothing, but just by visualizing, you actually grew a bit. That's insane. That is actually power of the mind. Okay, I love this cuz this is going to probably help me in more than just the financial and and asking people for you or telling them what their costs are for for dentistry. I'm also look the patients need to know how much it costs, right? like they need to know and so don't be embarrassed about the fees

[48:21] basically because that's very normal to feel that way especially from you know for a money mindset issue like I used to have so be proud of your fees because you are providing an incredible service incredible value right and so one thing that helped me a lot as well is because when I was charging someone let's say £300 for a restoration okay it's a restoration not a filling a filling is what what goes in a sandwich by the way right so when I charge £200 for a restoration okay at that point I was questioning oh my god I'm charging this much because that's the how much the practice charges But in my own mind is like is what I'm delivering actually

[48:52] worth £300? It was a self-doubt, right? And so one of the reasons I went on so many courses like my first 5 years was course after course after course. Okay, now if I'm charging for an hour of my time and I'm charging it's a complex mod complex buildup. Okay, and I'm charging £450. Okay, I think I'm cheap. I can charge more than that and I and I be more and I be happier because honestly the clarity in my protocols I have I know my patients are not going to come back with posttop sensitivity. I know that I'm using arabbrasion. I know I'm doing this. I know their occlusion is going to be on point, right? And I'm

[49:23] going to serve them well. I have this much. And please, I don't want anyone to see this as arrogance or anything. I really hope it doesn't come out that way. It's it's conviction in my training and my belief that I'm going to really help my patient. So that now I come to a point where I'm very easy for me to charge that amount cuz I truly believe I have done so much training. I'm ready for this. I can't wait to deliver you the best restoration you ever had. I love this. I don't want to take up too much your time here, but I do have one question I want to ask you off the back of this, right? Surely there must be a time where sympathy kicks in. I can

[49:54] almost imagine myself being an idiot and feeling sorry for patients and sometimes being like, "Oh, it's all right. I'll just discount that or that's all right. I'll just do it for free." Does that happen? Is this just me? All the time. All the time. How done that? It's what we call a neuroiscal drag, right? So, in my early my career, let's say the the figure in my mind is 150 cuz that's how much it should be. By the time it comes out of my mouth, it's lost 30 lb, right? It's 120, right? Here's a stupid thing, Nav, right? You say to the patient 120 and they're still going to be like, "Oh, 120? That's too much, right?" Yeah. And they didn't even know that was 150. You

[50:25] discounted it. The worst thing you could do is you give a discount, but the patient never knows that you got a discount. That's the worst thing that that's the you know, that's the stupidest thing ever. Well, I'm with you. Like, literally, you gave him a discount and they don't even they don't even feel that. And so, what was the point? You could have said 400. The reaction would have been the same. Okay. So, so really, yeah, I mean it's normal, especially from my money mindset background and my refugee background. I felt very sorry for patients and I discounted my treatment plans left right and center. I don't so much anymore. I'll tell you why. As an associate, if you do the maths, you know, if you look at profitability of dental practices,

[50:56] when you give a discount, you really, really screw yourself over, but you screw your practice over a lot like in a massive way, right? They have so many overheads, materials, and everything. It's an injustice, okay? Because you got to gross a certain amount per hour for them to keep the lights on. Yeah. And so you have to really remember to be respectful to where you work and your principal and it is a business because if there's no money in the business, there's no practice anymore. There's no job for you anymore. Okay? And so it's important to, you know, charge what you're worth and charge the right amount. Okay? But it's normal to want to give discounts and I get it. But over

[51:26] time when you really appreciate you know that you know you you are delivering a really good service and the fact that you need to be respectful to who you work for okay then I think when you realize that then I think something clicks and then whilst you can be empathetic and sympathetic of the patient look and if someone has told you look that's a lot of money was like look I appreciate lots of money and how can I help you well you can do it in phases there's finance plans if not now then we can always um save up and do the right thing next year we'll still be here for you and just be there to If someone can genuinely cannot afford it, you give

[51:57] them the options and like you know financing and stuff and or come back in the future. Sometimes you know John Ko famously said this like just because you don't want to do the right thing doesn't mean that I have to do the wrong thing. Ah I like that. And so sometimes if you're going to make the situation worse for someone then say look it's better you actually do nothing and save up and then come again next year and then we can help you better. And I genuinely think that's the best thing for you. And so again it's one of those things now that comes with experience. So we started with experience and I think we're ending with experience. I think this has been extremely enlightening and I'm sure everyone else who's in my

[52:28] position and probably even qualified has probably loved this. So Jazz, seriously, man, as always, absolute pleasure. You smashed it, man. No, thank you so much. Honestly, your questions were absolutely sick. They're amazing questions. So, I really appreciate it and we're definitely going to bring you back on to do more of these. I think you and Emma bring something a different flavor, which is wonderful. I think that that synergy is going to be amazing. And maybe we'll have you both on together as well one day, right? So, so that would be good. But we all wish Emma the best with her exams. And you got any exams coming up now? I'm still a couple of months away from it. So, I'm still good and it's year four, so the hard stuff starts in year five and then six. So,

[52:58] I'm taking it easy. Great. Well, I can't wait to publish this and please plug yourself. You got some stuff out there for dentists and dent students as well. Please tell us more about your channels. Yeah, so I've got a uh a YouTube channel called the Stew Dent. Just trying to be trying to be cool and mix dentistry into it somehow where I'm covering my journey as a dental student, what we cover as dental students, the highs, the lows, and vlogging my time here in Slovakia as well. So if anybody can find me on YouTube or I'll send you the the link you can add. I'll put the link. Please do subscribe to Nav as well guys. As you can see his energy is brilliant and he's

[53:29] very giving and sharing. So supportive and you know you can message Nav on Protrusive Guidance. He's on there. He's very active and so we're very grateful for that. So Nav, thanks so much for your time as well. I'll see you in the next one as well. Lots of love, man. Thank you very much. Well, there we have it guys. Thank you so much again again for listening to the end. If you are on the app, scroll down below, answer the quiz to claim your CPD certificate. We are a PACE approved provider for those of you who call it CE. And if you are new, thanks for joining us today. Please do give us a subscribe and a thumbs up

[54:01] if you enjoyed this episode or you learned something. What a wonderful job Nav did today. So well done, Nav. Really, really great questions. I thought you really helped the flow of this episode. I want to thank all of the Protrusive team, especially Jan, Erica, Cressel, Marie, Julia, and of course, Nav with everything he's doing. Remember that our community protrusive guidance is not just for dentists, it's for dental students as well. In fact, we have a whole little section for you guys, including crush your exams. There's all these notes that Emma has produced and they're stacking up really nicely at the moment. From indirect

[54:31] restorations to dental materials, there are loads of studentfriendly notes ready to download. Just make sure if you are a student, you email studentprotrusive.co.uk. Okay, with your proof to unlock some hidden areas. Thanks so much again for listening. I'll catch you same time, same place next week.
