# Fall in Love with Dentistry Again - How to Feel Fulfilled as a Dentist - IC060
videoId: XDxlUFeEpbw
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDxlUFeEpbw
duration: 58:33
publishedDate: 2025-08-21
publishedTimeText: 7 months ago

[0:00] There's a definite difference between doing more of something or because you're good at it and doing more of something because you enjoy it. You know, your values are a compass as to, you know, where you're going to go in in in life. I think if you are listening to this conversation and you are really struggling is that the first thing you need to do is you >> Hello, Brutusy. I'm Jazz Galati and welcome back to your favorite dental podcast. This is the interference cast, like the non-clinical arm, but a very important arm of the podcast. One of the

[0:32] things that Andrea mentioned is that when she was studying in dental school, that's what it was all about. It was just about studying and becoming a dentist and passing your exams. And I resonated with that so much because our date was 6th of June. I knew that on 6th of June 2013, we were going to get our results. And I could not imagine life beyond the 6th of June. Like it was all about am I going to become a dentist? This is what I've been building up my last sort of 8 to 9 years to do. Like I wanted to be a dentist since I was 14, but I couldn't even think about the

[1:03] future and what it will actually be like to be a real dentist in the real world. Now, fast forward so many years. I have a lot of real world insight and I'd love to share it with you today along with Andrea. I love people like Andrea because they are all about helping us feel fulfilled in densry. There are plenty of people out there who perhaps densry didn't go the way they planned. they leave and now they want to coach you on your exit plan, which I understand. But what I don't believe in is making permanent decisions based on temporary feelings and actually attempting to figure out exactly how to

[1:35] make dentistry work for you. Now, some things I didn't discuss in the conversation with Andrea cuz she was on a roll. I wanted to give her the space and time to talk about all the wonderful things, including the latter part, the end of the podcast whereby she actually gives real techniques. It's about five techniques she shares to help you feel more fulfilled from densory. But one thing I want to just talk about while I had this opportunity in the intro is the following. Have you actually decided, have you actually put pen to paper to write down what does your ideal day

[2:06] actually look like? Like you're actually allowed to have an ideal day. Have you thought about it? I didn't do this until a few years ago and it made a big difference to my clarity of thinking and where I want to take my career. And the other one of course is what does your ideal week look like? Once you've decided what your ideal day and ideal week looks like, then make that your goal. That's your aim. Why wouldn't you make some decisions right now to make your ideal day and your ideal week become a reality? For example, cuz I think examples really help. I am someone who if I don't exercise at least three

[2:36] or four times a week, I don't feel like I'm living to my truest value. I become grumpy. I don't feel like I'm enjoying my life as much as I could be. And so, I know in my ideal week, I need that. Now, I've had a few years in my career where that wasn't happening, especially when we were building OBA that was such a huge project. I had to wrongly sacrifice some health for that, but now I'm back on track. And so, slotting that into the ideal week for me is really important. And you make it work. And you make some key life decisions and something that you do with your significant other. You decide that you design your perfect

[3:07] life. How do you actually want it to look like? Where you going to live? What gym membership will I will have to make sure this all happens? And so it's about living a life of purpose, allowing you to live to your truest values. And that was just one example of me making sure that I design my ideal day and my ideal life to make sure I get to go to the gym three to four times a week. Another thing that was important to me is like I'm someone I'm not good at multitasking. I think most most of us aren't, right? And we shouldn't be multitasking. It's better to focus on one thing. And I'm particularly bad and like sometimes I get distracted and I feel like really overwhelmed easily. And

[3:38] so when I'm in clinical mode, I'm in clinical mode. And because I love my clinical density, it's not a big deal for me to do a 12-hour shift. I know it's not for everyone, but I'm more than happy to do an 8:00 a.m. till 8:00 p.m. if it means I can work less days, right? So, for me, that made perfect sense that I have a really long Monday and now I don't have to work a Thursday anymore, for example. And this has only just come to fruition. It's something that we agreed on about a year ago and then we had to wait for my Thursday patients to diminish if you'd like. And now I've really consolidated my clinical days. This allows me to be in the zone on

[4:09] Monday. And whilst I don't get to see my kids much on a Monday, I get to make up for it on the other days because now three days a week I get to do either a school drop off or a pickup or both. And the main point of sharing this detail with you, my friend, is that everything I'm trying to do is with great intention. It's on purpose and it's by design. And it doesn't happen overnight. It actually took a discovery process first and then you put your action plan and you relentlessly chase that. And that ideal week may look different for everyone. But if you don't decide what your ideal day or ideal week looks like, then you'll never get it. Right? If you

[4:40] don't know where you're going, how do you know when you'll get there? All right, that's quite enough of my rambling. I'll catch you in the outro. Enjoy, enjoy, enjoy this podcast with Andrea. So, Dr. Andrea Ogden, it is absolutely a pleasure to have you on Protrusive Dental Podcast. How are you? >> I'm very well and I'm very excited to be here. So, thank you so much for for the invitation to come and talk to you today. For those of you listening on Spotify, Apple, um Andrea's uh look well, it's a sunny, beautiful day today uh in in the UK for once. Uh and uh

[5:12] Andrea is looking bright and vibrant and that would really I I I think u be a great descriptor of some of the content I'm seeing from you, Andrea. Right. And the top word I'd probably say is relatable. I reached out to you because I'm just I'm loving what you're putting out to universe. So much of the podcast over the last six years has been I mean our tagline is fall in love with densry again. Okay. And I'm very much when when I do some speaking I say find your niche, find find a way and fight for it to make densry work for you. Right? And

[5:42] everything you're putting out there is just I'm I'm I'm loving it and I think we can learn so much from you and often with these kind of episodes Andrea I get so many messages saying you know what I really need that and that's what I want everyone to achieve. And so to start with Andrea, I want to learn about your journey because you do reference your journey a lot in in your post and stuff and I think you got a really interesting one. So can we start with that Andrea and tell us about yourself? >> Yeah, sure. Um I think I think if I if I am going to talk about my my journey, it's hard to kind of think you know well actually where where do we start? And

[6:14] the the reality is is that I probably need to go back all those years to when I filled out that UKcast form when I was doing my A levels. And you know, I filled out those four places for the you know, picked four four random dental schools. I didn't really put a lot of thought into it. Just was like, no, I really I really want to be a dentist. It's the only way I'm going to be happy and I'm going to find fulfillment and achieve my potential. Um I sent the UKCast form off and um I didn't even get a single interview. So I was like, "Oh, so they they I didn't even it wasn't

[6:44] like I got rejected." Like I didn't not offered a place like they didn't even want to interview me. So I think when I look back at the fact that that happened and I went and did a degree in human biology and then applied again and was successfully offered a place. But I I suspect in fact I know that that failure right at the beginning definitely played a part in many years while I was at dental school. There was definitely this fear of failure that I might not make it

[7:16] that I wasn't going to graduate that I might get thrown out. And I mean looking back that was crazy because I passed all the exams but it that fear was definitely there. And so for many years it was all about becoming a dentist rather than giving much thought into what it would be like once I became a dentist. And so you know that plus the fact that I don't come from a medical or a dental background. I didn't have anybody to mentor me or explain the realities. I did a bit of work

[7:46] experience and obviously you know you learn stuff while you're at dental school but I had you know no idea and I think you know looking back at that time at dental school I don't have any memory of getting any careers advice or you know even being given any kind of skills about the opportunities that are available to you once you have a dental degree. So when I graduated, um I think I was just kind of like, "Oh, okay. So now I'm going to do what everybody else

[8:17] does, which I'm going to go and do it was vocational training when I did it." And then I got myself a nice little associate job. And I really thought that >> MFDs and all that kind of stuff. >> Yeah. Yeah. Did all of that. It became it was textbox exercise. >> Everybody does this. I must do this. And I really thought that what if you're a successful dentist then you own a practice. So I needed to acquire the skills that you need to manage a business which you weren't taught at dental school. So I was like okay so this is this is the plan. This is this

[8:48] is what I'm I'm going to do. And there were definitely a couple of key pivotal moments. The first one I remember when I was I was an associate probably you know few years in as an associate and I just had that moment where I was like is this it? is this is this what I'm going to be doing for the rest of my working life being in this one room working with a nurse and the patient and then that's I just had this sense that I had so many more skills and potential that I hadn't

[9:19] tapped into and that clinical work in general practice alone was not going to enable me to do that and to grow in those in those things. The second thing was when I had an offer accepted to buy a practice and at the time I had a seven-month old baby. I was driving remember this moment so clearly. I was driving down the road and my seven-month old baby in the back of the car and it just hit me how much additional responsibility I was about to take on.

[9:51] My husband's not a a dentist, you know, my family aren't dentists. I There was that moment where I was like, "Hang on a minute. Just stop. just stop and think about this. This might not be the right choice for you. Why are you doing this? You know, are we just ticking boxes because you think this is what you should do rather than what you actually want to do or or need to just just take some time to think about it. And that really did set those two moments definitely set off a chain of reactions, you know, chain of events

[10:23] that made me evaluate not just what I want out of my career, what I want out of my life. >> Andrew, what what did you go ahead and buy that practice in the end or did you make a decision actually this isn't for you after all? >> Yeah. No, I made a decision that this wasn't for me. It was I think the sale was likely to fall through anyway. We were just we were literally at the very early stages and then you know it uh something came up with you know bank valuation all that kind of stuff that I was like actually no this is this is my chance to get out this this is not the

[10:54] right decision for me at this time you know let's just stop and let's just think about this and you know and take some time and work out where it is that we're going to go from here. >> Have you read the book the E-Myth or the dental version of the E-Myth? >> No I haven't. I haven't but I'm going to make a note of that so I can definitely read it after today. There's so many uh things that you're saying there because it argues like for example yes let's apply to densry but like one step back like for example several steps back and not even relate densry but like it gives an example in the generic book ETH

[11:24] revisited it gives an example of someone who just loves baking right they're just amazing at baking and then everyone says look you need to sell your your goods right your your baking is the best you know sell and then eventually she opens a shop and then she's there like 5:00 a.m. right? Baking and stuff and then she's there serving customers. Uh and then it grew and it grew and then eventually she's not baking anymore. She's just doing the account. She's managing people. She's doing this and the thing that she was in love with, right, which is the baking she was no longer doing anymore. And so that is like the the technician. Then we also

[11:55] have the manager and the entrepreneur. So these are three different roles. And as dentists, we get shoehorned into playing all these three roles. As a business owner, you're like the entrepreneur. You also become a manager. And then you're also a technician, you still have to do the implants, still have to do the ortholontics, you still have to do what is very challenging work. And this can be a real source of burnout and stress because you're trying to wear so many hats and everything is like brand new and and like you Andrea like I think very few people are fortunate enough to have clear mentorship whether it's family or or or

[12:25] close colleagues that they can rely on. Um a lot of people are just making up as they go along. Uh and and that's scary. So what did you do thereafter when you decided that okay a really good judgmental moment for you really good insight that you had potentially a good insight where you decided that this isn't for me how did you pivot from there >> I think the first thing I looked at was you know what was it that I really enjoyed in dentistry and I got into teaching very early on because my first associate job was in a

[12:56] foundation training practice so the FD was often coming in you know I wasn't their trainer but they'd often come in for a chat. I'd help them get bits of teeth out, find canals, and I got a kick out of it. You know, I realized quite early on that, you know, to be part of somebody's journey is a huge privilege. You even if you're just a teeny tiny bit. So, I think, you know, that that was always kind of there. And I thought actually, you know, I need to do more of this. I' I'd done my post-graduate certificate in dental education and I applied to be an educational supervisor in my own right. And then actually it

[13:28] was kind of so that was kind of already going on in the background and and it was that moment actually after being in the car with my eldest that I was like okay that well you know we need to look at how we can take this further and around the same time there was a job that came up to be a training program director in the east of England and I didn't think I was going to get it but I was like I I have to apply for this like this is you know we have to see where this can go and you know that that was at that point that was definitely, you

[13:59] know, the the biggest pivot because that changed my working week. you know, I went from doing five days as a clinical associate to actually doing three days and then two days was involved with foundation training and that I think that kind of initial variety increased variety in the week and actually having to learn all the different skills of working you know within a a much wider team and managing budgets and uh dealing with the trainers and the FDS you know

[14:29] that there was all this all these skills I didn't realize actually I didn't know I had to acquire those and learn quite quickly. And I was like, I'm actually, you know, I really enjoy learning stuff. I think most dentists do. That's one of, you know, you sign up to a lifelong commitment of of continued learning. So, it's like, okay, so let's you know, this is something else I hadn't realized about myself. How how can we how can we do that? So it it was definitely I think you know as you said most dentists you know they don't know and it is this kind of trial and error and just

[15:01] >> I think that's okay Andre because I think it's important to have you know you you you you need to trial I I always say you need to kiss a lot of frogs before you find your prince charming and in the context of finding out what your niche is or finding out if you should specialize in or finding out what kind of career you want to have and sometimes you need to figure out that actually I've done enough endo to realize I don't enjoy this and actually I really enjoy digital densry like for whatever it could be like they get a kick out of doing the lab side they get a kick out of CEK in contrast to to you like you

[15:31] felt as though that this is not for you to do it you know for the next few decades and and to do it in that room with a nurse whereas other people get a kick out of six days a week working in that room and they just love their clinical you know tiny details of densry whereas other people feel like they just want a variety in the week like you so is that what your week looks like now Andrea Yeah, my my week is is incredibly varied now. Um I think because after I finished working as a training program director, I I join the BBA as a member of their

[16:02] staff. Ultimately, that's that's really the amount of things different types of things that I do during the week, whether that is giving talks to foundation dentists or students, whether that is project work. I still work clinically as a as a dentist. It's it's for me variety was always, you know, a key thing that I wanted to tap into. I just um but for like you say for many people it's if they absolutely love working doing that clinical work then

[16:32] that that's what's right for you. The point is is that you know we're all different and it's about understanding who you are and what makes you tick and why it is that you wanted to do dentistry in the first place and how can you enable that and you're going to learn stuff about yourself throughout you know along the way like I didn't realize that I like teaching when I started doing dental school that was the last thing I thought about but so you discover these things that you're like okay well that's good how can I how can I do that a little bit more but I think probably one thing I I probably need to mention is

[17:03] I often hear people say, "Oh, you know, you need to find out what your strengths are." Like, let's say you're good at root canals. Like, you should do more root canals. I suppose like your the baking analogy that you were talking about, >> but there's a definite difference between >> doing something doing more of something or because you're good at it and doing more of something because you enjoy it because you can be good at something but not necessarily enjoy it and therefore that's not necessarily a strength. Mhm. >> So I think the two have to come hand in

[17:34] hand. >> I think usually they do, but there are instances where they don't. But I think sometimes you are you become good at something because you enjoy it and then you follow that path and and then that's the that's the ultimate. Um you're in a very privileged position, Andrea, in the sense that you've had you've touched the lives of many trainees. You've you've had to influence to mold them to support them and that's a really special uh thing to do. What have you learned from that experience in terms of what are the struggles? What's the plight of the young dentist nowadays? What kind of uh in what ways are they some of them

[18:04] potentially feeling not so fulfilled? What's keeping them up at night? What would you say to our colleagues listening and watching right now to that that might be relatable kind of like the content that you're posting out? What are the main challenges we face as dentists? >> Well, I think you know there's there's uh there's two main challenges that people have after they've graduated and particularly after they finished it finished foundation training. And the first one kind of I think is a very similar experience to what I had is that if you don't have the information about

[18:35] career options, you know, you you do end up just doing what you think you should. I mean, when we look at people that go into dental school, we're high ac academic achievers. Um, the vast majority of people have kind of gone through A levels, then they've gone into dental school, and it's very it's all mapped out. So if you do if you do very well at your A levels and you apply to dentistry and you're successful then you progress to year one and then you pass your exams and you progress to year two

[19:06] and so on and so on and then you do foundational vocational training and then all of a sudden unless you do DCT and specialy training like there's >> which is why so many do it Andrea I I think so many are doing it because they feel like well this just seems like a path and therefore I should do it not with any sort sort of uh real conviction or you know enjoyment of it or actually a desire to do it other than I think this is the next step because it kind of is a path that's already been made but it's not necessarily your path and so

[19:37] and then some people do it because they're afraid to go into practice and they're afraid of the the the big bad world out there. >> Yeah. I I think that can definitely definitely be a factor especially because you know you're going to get more support >> whereas you don't necessarily know you're going to get that continued support in in practice. I think that is that is a huge jump you know to go from that structure to that autonomy that you have. I mean it's it's hugely exciting the fact that you are in control. You make the decisions as to where you want

[20:08] to take your career which post-graduate training you're going to focus on. But because it is such a huge leap, I think it can feel tremendously overwhelming. And again, as you say, that that can be a factor as to why people choose the more prescriptive route, at least initially, just to to help them with that. >> I mean, I I can definitely relate to this, Andrea, because when I qualified, I did the DC, the DF1, then DCT, and then DCT2 because at the time, I thought I wanted to go down the specialist route and so I was keeping my options open. I was keeping my hand in practice at the

[20:40] same time with the Saturday job so I wouldn't desill. And then thankfully that gave me enough knowledge and experience to know that okay I actually don't want the hospital pathway for various reasons. I joked in a lecture the other week that if you had to just convert hospital densry into a Disney character then you know the sloth from Zootopia, right? It would be that right? So so for for me it was just like maybe it's my the way my mind works. I'm like this is all over the place. I need to be quick. And so for me it was like, okay, private practice or or or practice certainly is the way forward for me. And

[21:11] I'm glad I look back now. I'm glad I had enough insight at the time and I knew that, okay, this really isn't for me. I could do it. I'd probably be good at it, but it's going to be soul destroying for me to go down that path, right? And so I felt really confused. I had no idea what to do. Should I join the the rat race? Should I do an MSE? I was considering at the time I just made a bold decision. Me and my wife moved to Singapore. We worked in private practice there for 18 months. We came back cuz my wife got homesick. But then I never looked back cuz it gave me that foot into practice and I love what I do clinically now. But

[21:42] that was part of my journey of confusion and and figuring things out and and doing something bold. And everyone's journey is going to look a little bit different. >> Absolutely. But I think you you touched on a key point is that you know you kept your options open >> right at the beginning so you could gain you know maximum amount of information from all of the people that you met so you could make an informed decision. And I think that's the issue that sometimes if you don't if you don't have the if you don't have the options, you don't know what's out there, then how can how can you like just like when we tell our patients about treatment options, how can you make an informed decision about

[22:13] your career and your life? It's yeah it's it it's very interesting but I think that's that's ultimately been you know one of my big passions through the work through um the BDA is to develop their career hub because it used to just really frustrate me that there wasn't anywhere that you could put all that information in one place about these are all the jobs that you could do with a dental degree. This is what you need. This is where they're advertised. um you know these are the kind of you know routes that you can go down um if you

[22:43] want to do X Y or Z. I was just making um some notes there Andrea because um it just reminded me that the whole thing as as a parent as you'll know you know they say the days are long but the years are short and the other thing that we we and the reason I mentioned that is because in in in densry sometimes you have a really tough day and we think like really small in terms of uh the time scale but if you actually remember that where you're going to be now compared to 10 years time there'll be a huge difference think 5 years think 10 years rather than think just next year and you'll be amazed

[23:14] because if you if You think that oh if I don't make this really important decision now or if I mess up one year then this the end of my career is going to go down the really bad trajectory that's the the bad that's not ideal way to think because that's not true. You can have a couple of bad years or a bad year or a bad few months but then whatever that means for someone I think people will be able to relate to what that means for them but that doesn't it's not that's not career defining because our careers are wonderfully long in a good way and we get to mold it and and and re-evaluate it and reshape it at many checkpoints. Is that something that you think as well? Is that fair to say?

[23:45] >> Yeah, I totally I totally agree with that. I think you know the other thing I'd probably add to that is the fact that you know achie you don't need to achieve these things tomorrow like it's your career is long >> and I think going back to your question about you know the challenges that new graduates are facing um you know I didn't graduate in an era of Instagram and social media and I think you know it's there's something so there's something called the social social proof bias which is in the absence of an

[24:18] answer, you do what everybody else does. And I think when we're looking at social media in particular, there are some things that photograph a lot better on social media than others. So obviously, you know, cosmetic, whether it's, you know, composite buildups or veneers or, you know, smile makeovers photograph beautifully. Whereas if you have a picture of, you know, a perfectly executed um molar endo, it it might not gain the same traction. So obviously the

[24:49] algorithm is is going to show you certain things. You've also got to remember about the context of the post. You know, is that there to educate you or is that there to market to potential patients? And so, you know, it makes me think of this famous equation by a guy called Tim Urban that happiness equals reality minus expectation. So, if you if you're at dental school and you're seeing a lot of these cosmetic cases because that is what is coming through

[25:19] on social media and you think, okay, well, that's that's what I need to do. So, my expectations are that I'm going to graduate and I'm going to be able to do this. But obviously that takes time. That takes postgraduate training. It takes you know an all sort amount of resource. So when you graduate and you're not there or you think gosh like I'm so far away from that then you know your your reality is is way lower than your expectations. So you're in negative happiness. And I think that's a that's a challenge that certainly I didn't have but I think I'm seeing that in a lot of

[25:49] of uh of new graduates. to totally agree and then the next question I had which follows on so nicely from this is is about stress burnout and and and and I'm going to say it's important to address these sensitive matters but but suicide in densry we've lost a lot of colleagues over the last few years and and we have been for for decades and so the net is is there been a net benefit of social media in densry I don't know I think there's so many so many so much good I see in social media but comparison is a thief of joy right and so we are

[26:21] comparing ing especially now someone qualifying and they're seeing the work that's been done by someone 10 15 years but they forget the journey they just see their outcome and they think I need to be able to do this and everyone's like and it's fast-paced and that's maybe keeping them up at night time so um social media could be a source of stress and resentment if someone falls into the trap of comparing themselves right and comparing where they are compared to where their peers are for example which is a a dangerous thing to do why else do you think we are in a situation where many of us and some of

[26:51] the BDA polls was quite striking the percentages are feeling disgruntled or upset. >> Well, I think that's actually on the surface of it, you could you you turn around and you go, "Oh, well, it's because oh, it's because of high patient ex increased patient expectations. It's because of, you know, increased financial pressures. It's because of increased fear of of litigation." But I think actually, you know, if we're going to examine this question because we want to improve our well-being and improve the, you know, reduce the amount of

[27:22] stress that we're under, um, then we need to actually understand it a lot better and break it down. So, you mentioned the the BDA's poll. So every year the BDA as part of its evidence that it presents to the doctors and dentists review body surveys its members and over the last eight years they data has shown that the morale has reduced from about initially in fact 2015 it was about 40% of dentists said that they

[27:53] rated their morale is either high or very high and in 2023 that had kind of gone down to um about uh 20%. % >> said and what I find really interesting is that back in 2015 um about 50% of dentists surveyed would say that they would recommend dentistry as a career and >> fast forward to 2023 that's now reduced to about you know 35 36%. Hello YouTube Protruserati. I know

[28:24] you're watching on YouTube and I hope you're enjoying this episode so far. But I wanted to highlight in case you don't know yet, we have an amazing viewing experience on protrusive.app, our website, our network, our platform. So I just want to spend a minute to show you what this looks like. On the left side, you see the navigation and when you join the app, you get a one minute video tour of the entire network. Now, in terms of where the magic happens, that's in the protrusive community. Cuz you might come for the content, but you'll stay for the community of the nicest and geekiest dentists in the world. We have all these

[28:55] polls. We have a chat group. There's always active chats and dentists helping dentists. And really, what I wanted to do is create a really supportive environment that's not like the environment we have on Facebook. And it's built on the values of niceness and geekiness. If you are nice and geeky, you belong here. Now, to make this a safe space, we have a manual process of approval. We actually verify that you are a dental professional before you get in here. So, we have hundreds of applicants a day. So, if it's been about 2 days and you haven't heard anything,

[29:26] either something's in your junk or you need to reach out. If you're still waiting to join your tribe, email Marie at protrusive.co.uk. That's m a r i protrusive.co.uk and she'll investigate what's happened. Now, all the videos you have on YouTube are also on here, but you actually have some extra ones for free that you don't have on YouTube. So, you get some bonus content that's not on YouTube. And actually, for the future, I'm not taking things out of YouTube, but some things are not appropriate for the wider public. And I want to sort of safeguard that information, which is like dentist talk if you like. So,

[29:57] that's why a lot of the content is only here and not on YouTube. So, you're kind of missing out if you're not on here. That's why I'd love for you to join there. And if you join one of our paid plans, then what you get is access to the CE quiz like this one and you can get CPD or CE certificates and also you get our premium notes. So these are a great aid memoir or revision for an episode to really cement your learning. And whilst we have ads and YouTube places ads on YouTube, we don't have that on our network. So for the paid plan, you get to see all of the premium notes without any of the ads. And of course, you get to support team

[30:28] Protrusive and help us to continue what we're doing. I'm just going to gloss over the protrusive vault which has all our infographics and downloadables. These are all our master classes at this moment in time and we're always planning to add more. And if you look at there's about 1 2 3 about seven of them. But actually if you look at the replay section, some of the live master classes that I've done and some of the training that people pay for on other websites is all on there included as part of the masterclass subscription. And if you're a student, don't fear. We have a special section for you with all the student notes which anyone can access. So for example, here is one on Exodia. So, it's

[31:00] all there waiting for you on Protrusive Guidance. Please head over to the website which is protrusive.app. Make an account on your browser. This could be Safari, Chrome, however you want to do it. And once you've made your login, then you can download the iOS or Android app and then log in through there. So, the reason to make the subscription primarily on the website first is that you get access to the free trial, which you don't get if you make an account on Android, iOS. If you make it on the website, you get access to the free trial and you get our best price if you sign up through protrusive.app. So,

[31:30] our best deals and free trials are only on protrusive.app. Of course, we always put the link below in the description and thank you so much for enjoying our videos on YouTube. But it's now finally time to level up your experience. Back to the episode. >> So, um, when we when you look at those surveys and you say, "Okay, what causes you the most stress?" Interestingly for practice owners like 90% of them said it's increased practice cost cost and for associates it's fear of litigation and then the list kind of

[32:01] goes down. I think it's, you know, and number two is staff. Like if how easy it is to recruit staff, how if you're an associate, what's the staff turnover? If you, you know, if you you don't have the same nurse all the time. Um, and then it becomes like about financial concerns. And then I think number four was hitting hitting NHS targets. >> And so we can look at those and go, oh yeah, okay, so that's why why dentist stress, but I think it's important to remember that they are external factors. And so with external factors there's actually you're limited as to how much

[32:33] you can control them. Um then we've got to look at the nature of the job which if you're in general practice it can be isolating. Um you know you could be in in in a big practice but you could end up working in a bit of a silo if you're if you're not careful and you don't you know if there isn't that kind of culture that you know everybody helps each other out and you all work together. Um, plus like the huge amount of mental load that comes with the job. Um, I think the fact that, you know, as a dentist, you know,

[33:05] as as you said, you know, you're doing all of these things. It's not just the the one job. um you know as a self-employed individual you're you know you're the accounts you're you know you're doing the actual clinical work you're you know that the and all your >> communications with labs and patients and letters and planning itself the whole just getting a decent treatment plan when you're conflicting your mind like what is the best thing to do that takes up so much choice fatigue and and decision-m skills in your head >> it does it does I mean the list just goes on and on doesn't it and I think

[33:37] you know when you the problem is when you're make making decision ision all the time is that your brain doesn't get a chance to shut off and then when you leave work you're still replaying some of those events and decisions throughout the day. you can leave work but mentally you're still there. And so when you don't get that level of restbite and obviously you get home and and you've got you know other financial constraints and pressures whether that is a mortgage to pay or the kids to pick up or you know who you know we've all you know got

[34:09] everything else in life. >> Exactly. >> Exactly. So, you know, it's it's really really fast-paced. And I think because we don't get that time to if we're not careful to just just pause and just, you know, reflect and think, okay, you know, I just need to take some time just to slow down. And I mean, I can't meditate, but if you can, that's great. Um, but you what whatever works for you, but you just need a time just just to kind of slow down. So and and I think also you know the kind of people that are naturally attracted to dentistry you

[34:40] know we tend to be high achievers people who you know we want to do a great job I whether we're perfectionists or not but you know we want to do a great job and we want to help people and so you know when things go wrong as inevitably sometimes they do they don't work out as as well as you'd like them to do we can take if you're naturally I don't want to say a people pleaser but you want to help somebody then you can take that failure very personally. Um so I think that contributes to that and then we've got you know the other internal factors

[35:11] which are really specific to you and you know that is when you've got you know a clash of of basically you internal stresses usually come from a clash of values. So that means that your action or your environment is conflicting with what's really important to you and that makes this kind of internal cognitive dissonance which you might not spot. You might not even realize that it's there but over time massively contributes to burnout. And so

[35:44] I think you know it's it's it's you know your values are a compass as to you know where you're going to go in in in life. And I think sometimes, you know, it's I meet people that are like, "Oh, no. Dentistry is just not for me." And you're like, "Well, actually, is it?" And when you really delve down into it and you look at the kind of things that are causing them stress and draining their energy, you're like, "No, actually, it's got nothing to do with dentistry. It's just a mismatch between your environment and your actions." So, if we can change that, then actually,

[36:15] you know, that will make you the world of difference for you. >> I I think I've never had an episode where my my neck is hurting. so much cuz I'm nodding so much. Um, it's honestly like the the cognitive dissonance like I I talked about this a couple of years ago, right? And I'm so glad you mentioned it again because like I don't want to talk about specific scenarios cuz it's an international audience. But let's say um an example I've used in the past is you go on a course, you learn how to find MB2, okay? And you learn how to find it, okay? And now when you are

[36:45] working and you're like you don't have much time to do this endo and everything's like rushed, okay? and you know how to find the MB2, but now you don't have the time or the or the tools to find it. That's a source of stress. That's a cognitive dissonance in itself. Absolutely. Or you know that you should be doing things a certain type of way, but because of the environment you're in, you are having to take shortcuts or just something that may have worked in the past for you, but now because you know better or you know different or you want to be a certain way, but you're not able to be your true self. That eats you up inside. Especially like you said for

[37:16] us who want to do a good job and many of us do love our clinical density and we work in microns and we want to be proud of what we do but we're not able to do it. >> Yeah, I think that you've hit the nail on the head. I think you know that there's lots of examples that I can can give of that and it's I mean it could be something as simple as you know maybe you know you really value family time but you having to work really long hours. you're having to stay behind because, you know, you don't have enough time to do your notes and your referral letters during the day. And so,

[37:48] actually, that's a massive conflict of of your value. Like, actually, it's got >> I'm so glad you mentioned that nonclinical one. I'm very I'm very pleased. And the other one would be like you value your health and fitness, but because you're you're working so much that you don't then you neglect the gym. You have the gym membership, but you only go once a month, but you really you you're at your best. You have the most energy when you're going three or four times a week, but you've sacrificed that for for work or for something else. Yeah. Yeah. And I think um you know another example that something I've certainly experienced and it took me a

[38:18] while to work it out was that for me actually autonomy is is really important to me. And so you know if I'm working in an environment where I lose control of my list and that you know the reception are putting in patients here there and everywhere um you know for some for one dentist that that might be they might love that they might love the challenge whereas I want the day to be separated into this is when I see emergency patients or this is when we do this kind of treatment and if I lose that sense of

[38:50] autonomy then that causes me a huge amount of stress. So, it's about understanding what specifically triggers you and you only really understand that if you've actually put in the work, which can be quite uncomfortable work to be honest, as to what is important to you and why >> hard now is an easier tomorrow, as I say. So with with that, let's talk about the the the final phase which I'm the most excited for, right, is let's talk about some practical steps every dentist can take to fall in love with dentistry

[39:21] again and ensures that it fuels them and it it doesn't feel like it's a chore or a burnout and it helps us to reconnect with why we got into the profession. In fact, actually that reminds me of there's a book called Can't Hurt Me, David Gogggins, right? And then one of the techniques he uses is you reach into the cookie jar. So he's an ultraathon runner, right? So let's say he's done like 80 miles and he's running and he's getting a little bit tired and he's losing his energy. He's losing his focus, right? He reaches into the cookie jar where he remembers he he he searches inside. He remembers a time where he

[39:52] where he was successful or he conquered something and he tries to tap into that energy and something I haven't spoken much about before but uh is something I think is relevant to hear is many of us okay the vast majority I think at some stage when you were doing the UKCast form for example Andrea right at one stage you really really really wanted this you really wanted to be a dentist like if you tap back to that energy when you're 18 19 25 whatever how much uh old you are when in your individual journey at some stage you were like you sleepless nights waiting for the results

[40:22] to come out to find out if you'd be you know become a dentist or not and that's what you really wanted at one stage and to remember that and to tap into that energy and that's the our version of a cookie jar to help you to ignite you to do the hard work that you need to do like you said Andrea to help make sure that you carve a professional life you that serves you. Yeah, absolutely. Tap tapping into to that original why is fundamental. But I think also it's important to to say that you know once you've tried different stuff that that why actually might

[40:53] change a bit and that's okay >> and and okay. >> Mhm. Great. So to share some pract because I've seen so much practical stuff uh shared by you on Instagram. Um, can you share your your top tips that you give to your trainees or you or or you educate on to make sure that someone listening today can really go away and think, you know what, I think that's a great idea. I can apply these few things to make a big instant difference to my fulfillment. Well, I think the first thing to say just because we've we've touched on stress and and tragically

[41:23] increased suicide rates, I think if you are listening to this conversation and you are really struggling is that the first thing you need to do is you you must seek support and there's lots of support out there. That's Samaritans, the BDA has its health assured counseling service. Your indemnity provider may have counseling support as well. So if you are really struggling then there's absolutely no shame. It's as we've talked about it's it's kind of an insane job when you think about it.

[41:53] And so we're all going to go through periods of time where we're not doing too great. And what's important is that you know you know and you access professional support when you need it. When we're kind of if we're just looking at you know how can we how can we make life more fun? How can we you know improve our life in in practice? I think, you know, we've kind of touched on this already. The number one thing you've got to do is get clear on what is it that you like dentistry. What is it that you that actually does excite you

[42:26] and then look at how you can do more of it, but to even kind of have these thoughts that we've been having when when when we were talking about how how rapid everything is and how how our brains just are going a million miles all the time. I think the number one thing that I would advocate is that you just find a way of stopping. So, I can't remember who it was that I heard say this, but basically if you're looking about even making any kind of change, it

[42:56] could be a small change, it could be, you know, a big career change. I mean, who knows? If you're driving a car, you can't reprogram the satnav while you're still driving. So, you need to be able to have time just to pull over. >> And I'm not saying stop working. I'm saying see if there's a way that you can actually dedicate time during the week and put some real boundaries around it. You're like, okay, well, you know, on a Thursday night between whatever, I'm just going to I'm just going to sit and

[43:28] I'm going to think I'm going to do some work on this. I'm going to do some Googling. I'm going to >> protected time. >> Protect Absolutely. create some protective time. You know, if you really are thinking that, you know, you're not actually sure whether you dentistry long term is is for you, then actually I would you need to think about maybe just having that protected time, but perhaps even just reducing either a clinical afternoon or a clinical day. But it needs to be they these goals need to be smart. So there needs to be a time-specific element to it. Otherwise,

[43:59] you know, you can just we just get carried away and we do other stuff. But if you're like right okay in the next four months I'm going to make a decision about where I want my career to go or what kind of post-graduate training or what kind of jobs I think I'm going to shadow or you know what I'm going to find out what's right for me. So create >> finding a mentor of a certain kind was giving an example like I want to get a mentor in implants and I need one local to me could be your main thing that you've identified that is going to help

[44:29] you to to go to the next gear. Yeah, absolutely. But you need these, you know, these things need to be I would say it needs to be time specific to make sure that you are actually going to do it. It's human nature because if you don't have any urgency, then everything else will just fill up and that will get left behind. So I I totally agree. You need to have a if you actually write down a specific date and a specific time and where you're going to be at that time when you're going to make the decision, then that can be quite a powerful like uh it just gives you your mind some clarity.

[44:59] >> Yeah. Uh absolutely. So having and and having protected time to be able to do that um is going to is going to really help you. Um so yes, so we're getting we're getting um clear on our why. We're creating protected time to kind of do go through that thought process and then put in the work of whether that's like you say finding a mentor doing the doing the googling, doing the research, >> doing the shadowing for maybe some areas that might interest you that you think, okay, I could pivot my career into sleep or I could pivot into endodonics and then actually doing your due diligence

[45:30] and and shadowing because you might decide actually that wasn't for me because X Y and Zed. >> Yeah. And I think, you know, for some people, you know, it's if if they're in a similar situation to what I was and they like variety and obviously we get a lot of variety in practice anyway, but if you want variety as in different types of jobs, I mean, I think that dentistry is incredibly unique. Like I truly believe there isn't a degree out there that gives you the amount of flexibility and opportunity that a dental degree does. I mean, the fact that I do clinical practice on one day

[46:02] and then I might be talking to somebody else on another day or I'm, you know, I'm I'm working on my computer on a, you know, on a project on another. It's you actually when I look at it, it's all bit insane. But, um, and obviously I that gives me a tremendous amount of pleasure, but the fact that I can even do that, I can't think of any of my friends that have done other degrees and qualifications that have that level of variety to their week. So, you know, it could be that you think, well, do you know what? Actually, you know, maybe I'd like to go and demonstrate at a dental school or, you know, just do that as a

[46:34] general practitioner half a day a week >> or even um I'm just thinking out loud here, dental charity work, dental aid. Some people have gone into that and and they love that. They get so much fulfillment from their career from that. >> Yeah. No, there's there's absolutely loads of things that >> Oh, business the business of dentistry, right? So like you know some people get a kick out of owning three to four practices and then for that reason they only had to I read someone um from a colleague I really respect. He said when you get to about four practices and you own four practices you really kind of have to think about giving up clinical dentistry because it's a big ordeal if

[47:05] you're going to manage to high degree of success but that might be different for different people. You know, you might still keep your hand in clinical, but certainly you might find that the whole marketing element and hiring and the the managerial stuff, you get a kick out of that and having a vision for your practice and employing the right not employing, but hiring the right associates in your team and building that team and it's like a project development, you know, that could be your calling. >> Yeah, completely. And I think, you know, another thing that we need to do is look at, you know, especially when we were

[47:36] talking about stress because obviously we're all we're all under stress to some level. Obviously, how much and what that stress is, it depends on you and your individual circumstances. But I think certainly when I was a younger dentist, I would hear this word resilience and I would think, oh, okay, well, I've just got to toughen up. Like this is what it is. Like I just need to like keep cracking on and eventually it might get better. And so there's there was definitely this misunderstanding between resilience in terms of toleration versus adaptation. And so it's, you know, just

[48:08] if you are finding that some, you know, oh gosh, you know, I'm I'm driving to work and I just don't I just don't I'm feeling it today. Like it's it's understanding like why it is. And then once you've worked out those specific stress triggers, how can you manage those? Like if it is like the example I gave about autonomy in the diary. It's actually quite an easy one to fix. Um you know there'll be some things that are harder to fix and you might be like actually no this is not the right environment for me. I need to change

[48:39] environments. But again, it's getting clear about what it is that's specific to you that causes you stress and anxiety and then coming up with a manageable plan as to how you can either adapt to it or ultimately if you can't do that then remove yourself from that. And the final um bit of advice um is actually no there's two there's another one that's just come to my head. So community community is um a such an

[49:09] important part >> and obviously you've built this incredible you know community um through Protrusive and but it's you really got to you got to find your tribe >> and it's not just about um finding a community online. It's about finding people who you can pick up the phone to you see face to face who understand what it is like to be doing your job. um because dentistry is so so unique, it's very hard to explain it to somebody who's not a dentist that you know that

[49:41] what the realities of the job are and why why it is you know can be very challenging sometimes. Um >> I just want to give an example of that. Andrea, my wife um she's a dentist. She's a community dentist. She's now pivoting into um private practice uh pediatric private practice. She's got MSE and impeded >> massive imposter syndrome. Like she's being kept up at night. She's having this huge imposter syndrome. And I'm saying Sim you're going to be absolutely great. You're going to be fine. But but then um I I got her in contact with the the dental moms network. There's it's it's a new network that's been set up and she's going to their like inaugural

[50:11] conference in a couple of weeks time which I think is wonderful. That's like she's finding a you know a real in-person event. The magic of inerson you can't be replaced. And she's going to go there and one of the talks is all about impost syndrome. And these are really high achieving women in dentistry that is going to inspire her and to to find that source of inspiration from and then look yeah look online as well but look beyond and look find local as well and you be willing to travel or pick up the phone to find that tribe. Totally agree. >> Yeah absolutely and that's that's just you know one example of you know the

[50:43] many of these these group and I'm seeing more and more spring up which is which is fantastic. you know, it's the the issue I would say that you just need to be aware of is that if you're if if it's only like yearly or couple of, you know, twice a year that you're going to these these conferences, see if if you don't have a local network, see if you can if you can build that. See, the BDA have branch and sections events. There'll be local dental councils. There's there's lots of things that you can get get involved with. And also by having that

[51:13] element of community, it's not just about support. It's about career opportunities as well. Um if I think about because you know we're such a tiny profession really the nature of many jobs don't they don't even come to the online boards. >> So to to find out about these kind of whether that's in practice or these other kind of weird and wonderful opportunities that that come along you need to have a strong network in order to be able to access them or even know know they exist. So community really is

[51:44] key. Um, the final thing is that you need to you need to enjoy the journey. And I think going back to the what we were saying about tickboxing. It's so easy to kind of steamroller down this road of I'm going to achieve this or I'm going to get this qualification without and then you get it and then you're like okay what's next? What's next? Let's go. Let's go. And actually, you know, you have what you have achieved just to even qualify or graduate as a dentist is amazing. like >> you you have to you have to be able to

[52:16] you know if you're looking at the next mountain you have to look at the mountain you're already standing on and I think I think we can be quite bad at that sometimes and just going actually if you'd shown my 18 19year-old self who I am it's going to blow their mind but it's having that kind of realization that you know well done you like just having having that bit of recognition for yourself and and it's not even just looking at the big things I would say if you're in just one of the massive things that will make a difference to you in practice is looking at your micro wins.

[52:49] We all get really focused on oh I don't think that prep went as well as I don't think I'd got the angle of this or like that could have been better like we become you super self-critical and actually you're like no what what did go right today you know what difference have I made to the people I got this person out of pain or it could be something you know really simple and just but just by taking a moment to think about actually I make a difference on a daily basis and so yeah What a privilege. What an amazing privilege

[53:21] that is. And you know, I think that really is kind of the message that I keep I keep keep going on about is that we are in such a privileged position. We have this incredible degree. We have incredible qualifications and you know we so many people don't have that privilege and so the last thing we want to do is is you know not utilize it and you know not be not be happy because ultimately you know if you're happier in what you do then that

[53:54] doesn't just affect you affects the people you live with definitely um but it impacts your patients. I mean there's a growing body of evidence to say that happier clinicians have have better outcomes. Um so this is it's vitally important. You know it's it's essentially life is short. Let's not waste it. Let's let's think about things that give some intention as to what we're going to do with our career and our lives. Not just for ourselves but for those around us as well.

[54:24] >> I'm I'm applauding. I love that. That was fantastic. I can't I can't wait to share this with everyone there. Andrea, I I'm just going to just I guess round it off by saying I agree that this is truly a phenomenal profession, but if you're feeling at this moment in time that hey, actually it's not it's not feeling like a great profession. Everyone's saying that, oh, there's so much flexibility, then you've cornered yourself in, you need to embrace the difficult period of either discovery or action taking, taking massive action, picking up the phone, writing an email. The worst thing you could do is just be

[54:54] stagnant and watch the entire world collapse around you and not do anything about it. One thing I have been good at over the years is taking it by the scruff of the neck and and making brave decisions and and key decisions and and sending those emails and having that conversation, my principles, whatever it could be to make sure I carve out the life by by design and by choice and not wait for things to happen to me, i.e. being proactive. Okay. And that's so so important. Andrea, how can we learn more from you? How can we reach out to you? How can people send you a box of

[55:26] chocolates and flowers for the mood that they're in right now? >> The easiest way is um yeah, if if you want to send me stuff, that's um I'm sure we can provide some form of address. Um yeah, the easiest way to contact me is actually through Instagram, Dr. Andrea Ogden. Then um then you can find out everything you need to know about me and uh the onetoone coaching that I do. >> Excellent. So you're you're doing coaching and you're sharing so much on Instagram. So I highly encourage everyone to follow Andrea. I'm going to put her link in the show notes. Thanks for thanks for helping us to fall in

[55:57] love with dentistry. Again, I think it's so so important to to you know, we do so much CPD on various aspects, you know, cosmetic stuff, composite stuff. This is the important CPD right here. Reminding yourself how to get out of a tough spot, how to re-engage and get ree reinvigorated from your career. But this is an annual exercise, every monthly exercise. Okay. And so this is so important and thanks for for helping us put this together, Andrea. >> Oh, it's been my absolute pleasure. It's been so lovely to talk to you. Thanks for having me on.

[56:28] >> You as well, Andre. Thank you so much. Well, there we have it, guys. Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end. Look, sometimes when you are given advice, you enter like paralysis or choice fatigue and you don't know what to do. Listen, just do one thing. Pick one technique that Andrea talked about or what I talked about in the intro and implement it. Maybe that's going to be writing down what your ideal day and ideal week looks like. Even if it's so far from what your reality looks like at the moment, if you actually put pen to paper in some protected time to to actually discover what does your ideal

[56:58] day and ideal week look like and then for the next few years or few months or wherever your time scale is that you choose, you relentlessly chase that, my friends. And feel free to share it. If you're on protrusive guidance right now, put it in the comments or start a new community post. We're all friends here. It's a safe space and we'd love to hear from you. This episode, by the way, is eligible for CPD or CE credits. Protrusive education is a PACE approved education provider and our CP credits are valid all over the world including US, Australia, New Zealand, you name it. We have two main plans like if all you

[57:29] have time for is the podcast and that's where you want to get the CE for, then we have the podcast plan. But if you also want to access all our master classes that we have and some of the best dental webinars you've ever seen, I promise you, you will never laugh so hard and learn so much from these webinars that we have. And that's from our ultimate education plan so you can choose your protrusive flavor. I've put in the show notes, by the way, how to get in touch with Andrea and our Instagram link. If you like this episode, please let her know. We need more people like Andrea in the world. And you know what? We need more people like you in the world. Thank you so much for reaching all the way to the end. It shows that you're dedicated. It shows

[58:00] that you really want to make a difference for yourself, for your loved ones, and for your career. My friends, I'll catch you same time, same place next week. Bye for now. And of course, thank you so much Team Protrusive for behind the scenes all the hard work they do. Bye-bye now. [Music]
