# How this Doctor is Using AI to Audit his Communication and Conversion! - IC069
videoId: L38Hhu855Ro
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L38Hhu855Ro
duration: 46:00
publishedDate: 2026-03-16
publishedTimeText: 1 month ago

[0:00] First, if they are storytellers, they can explain to the patients what's going on without using jargon. Cuz once they understand the what, now we got to wrap them around to understand how we do that. And that's part of building rapport. Here's the catch. I don't I just don't transcribe. Transcription does not give you enough. Why? Transcription does not give you tone and clarity. It does not give you emotional connection. That's one aspect of AI. How do we, you know, part of the storytelling is having the tools. So a good storyteller will have excellent tools. A little tip I would give to all

[0:31] the doctors here, set up a system with your treatment plan coordinators. >> AI is everywhere. You cannot escape it. So why don't we learn to embrace it and use it to help us make our lives easier. Like in our personal lives, we already use things like chat GPT to just save us time, make convenient decisions, get some tips or recipes or sometimes I take a photo of a salad bowl and ask, "How many calories is this?" And of course, we all use chat GBT to diagnose the medical conditions that we think we have. And that's life. And our patients

[1:01] are doing the same thing. But now when we bring AI into the clinic, you guys already know I love using AI to write my notes. I absolutely hate writing notes with a passion. You've heard me speak about this before. We did an episode how to never write notes again. And on the back of that, we created on the app a dedicated space for all the digital TCO users that started to use AI to write their notes because they hated like me writing notes. To this day, for all my consultations, I use digital TCO and I absolutely love it. So, I'm absolutely

[1:32] sold by how AI can make our lives easier. And of course, we have other facets of AI like radiographic interpretation and we'll be talking about that in this episode today. Now, today's guest is Dr. David Amodor and the way that he's using AI is really clever. Like I'm very impressed in the different ways he uses it and more ideas on how it can be our friend and not our foe. But I love that he's using it to audit his communication. I.e. the AI is listening to his conversations patients. He's feeding back some data like for

[2:04] example what treatments patients go ahead with for example. and he's able to then audit and continually improve the way he communicates with his patients. It's really fascinating. So, let's explore how AI can help you in densry through this episode with Dr. David Amador. Let's join the main interview of this interference cast and I'll catch you in the outro. Dr. David Amador, welcome to the podcast, my friend. Where are you from, >> man? Jazz, thank you so much for having me on. I've heard your podcast a couple of times and to be part of this like global uh communic uh communication and

[2:34] group is amazing. So, actually hailing from South Florida where it's always warm. The trees, the palm trees just dropped coconuts and that's pretty much what you get. >> Are you in Miami? Is that where you are? >> So, I'm about uh 15 miles north of Miami. >> I mean, that's awesome, man. >> Yeah. So, it's uh this weekend cuz it's Memorial Day weekend here in the States. Basically, we're going out. So, you know, Florida, you have Atlantic on one side, you got the Gulf of Mexico or Gulf of America, whatever, whatever it's called now, however we're calling it on the other side, which the water right now, it's just beautiful with sunset. So

[3:05] we do every year we do Memorial Day. We do four days out there with a family on the beach and have a great time. So looking forward to it. So today when we're done with the day, it's emergencies. I'm done. I'm out. Goodbye. That sounds absolutely spectacular. David, tell us about yourself in terms of you. Are you a practice owner? Are you associate? And then I want to learn more about cuz the theme of today is how you are using AI. You know, it's 2025. What are the different ways you're using AI? my I'll share my AI journey with you and experiences but I want to have this just like you know a little chat with you about the different ways we're using AI but just tell us about you and how

[3:36] you evolved into this position. >> Yeah. So actually we are me and my wife were partners in our office. We have a nine chair office in the uh in South Florida. Midtown Dental Studio is the name of it. It's also our handle on YouTube and everything. And we are the owners. So we were moonlining for probably about 6 years in the states working for other dentists. And we just got tired of stagnant growth in the sense of you know the old mindset of if you build it they will come is not like that anymore unless you build it in the right spot like a rural community you're the only one there and you have this

[4:07] massive sign that with 60,000 cars only way it's going to happen nowadays if you're not working on all forms of social media that you're not putting a percent of your net into marketing and re-evaluating that marketing and figuring out how it's hitting and working the uh the triangle as we call it. You know, the base is going to be your website. How good is your SEO? And then everything you do just funnels into where everything lands. So, we got tired. >> Is this all stuff that you picked up? Like, is this like you're talking all the you know, a lot of dentists don't know what SEO is, right? A lot of

[4:38] dentists don't think much about their website and you seem very switched on. Is this something that you had prior to joining dentistry or is this something that you had to develop as part of becoming a business owner in dentistry? >> It's part of becoming a business owner, Jazz. So a lot of dentists think, man, I'm a dentist. And this is the hardest part of dentistry. You come into dentistry, you graduate, you're a doctor, you're a physician, you're like, you know, the pinnacle of the groups you're with. But when you come into the office, you know, you you could see the problems with patients and you understand the problems because you've gotten CES with Spear or whoever else.

[5:08] But now the problem is everybody thinks you could see the problems within the business, within your your employees and your team. And let's go to the doctor. He's got a DDS. He's got a graduate degree. He can figure out my emotional problems. And then what do we do as doctors? We seek help from other doctors. We join more clinical groups, more study clubs, and it just becomes drill more, fill more, take more teeth out, but none of the other HR problems are being talked about. None of this conversation of growth is being talked.

[5:40] So what is the nuance? Then we go to another CE course. And one of my favorite ones is they go, "What's your new patient and what's your collection?" And I could tell you the rest, but they're not talking about how do you keep patients in the third part. How do you close the back door? And that's all about team. Wrong finger. Let me put this finger, not that one. It's all about team and how do you build team? How do you build culture? How do you build your own internal? So part of that is I'm a coach in this stuff. Um I'm part of uh the bulletproof podcast. So they have a really good mastermind and I joined up in that about probably three years ago. And that journey just changed

[6:10] from like took the clinical hat, put it aside, and it just started being part of a group of organization of people that are all having HR issues, business issues, and you start feeding off of these different things, and you start learning. So my journey with AI started 3 years ago with them. You know, I'm here signed up for like how do I grow my practice? Give me the marketing hack 101 that's going to make me scale from 10 new patients to 55. I need to get to 100 in 5 years. Give it to me. And it my first year was a very humbling

[6:41] experience because I had to like there isn't a hack. You mean I can't just turn on like this Google ad that's going to bring in thousands of patients >> like a machine. You know you you put some money in and turn some out. >> Exactly. And and you know what and I'm going to I'm going to back up. There is ways to do that. But what's going to be your retention cuz I mean hey listen I spent when I had signed up my first year I had signed up with one group. Not going to say the name. It hits really hard on on uh on Facebook and Instagram on for dentists. They are really good at marketing. So, if I say the name,

[7:11] everybody's going to see see the popup. That's not going to happen. But I was dropping about $7,000 a month. And on one month, we peaked at 85 new patients. So, cost of acquisitions with everything probably about 180 for each new position uh new patient. So, cost of acquisition is cost to acquire one patient. But the retention rate for these new patient was stagnant was about 6%. It was basically not fitting the genre of the patient we were looking for. Like we had people coming off the streets thinking everything was going to be free. So it's

[7:42] like whoa. So you know there are ways to get patients in but the question is what's the return going to be on? Can you actually help these patients or are you is it false profiting like a you're being a false prophet selling them free ideology and free treatment and getting their hopes up and then destroying them. So it's a fast way to zero. So it's like finding that cutting edge and then that's where like there's so much different tools now. Don't need to know how to do it. You just got to understand it. And there's so many tools now to teach you how to do it. And it's just simply by open up chat GPT. Hey, can you

[8:13] explain SEO? I mean David the whole chat GBT thing. What I love one one thing I love doing now is I'm driving to work and I'll switch on the obviously the page feature. You you just have a nice conversation with chat GBT, right? And and they're coming back with you and I love my conversation with Chat GBT. You know, I say I today I was thinking like, okay, I'm making a hiring decision right now, right? I'm really stuck between two fantastic candidates who to hire, [clears throat] right? And I said, okay, act like Mark Twain and uh Richard Branson had a baby and tell me that that individual, well, how would they decide who to hire? And I

[8:43] had this lovely exchange. So, um I use chatbt. I mean, very extensive. Actually, we do recordings in the office uh for presentations, for team training and everything. And then I plug it into custom algorithms in chatbt that we created based on several books. Multipliers, how to win friends and influence, Dale Carnegie, the art of persuasion, the art of the deal, what's it called? So many different books, traction, EOS, exactly like so many different books that are all about em the emotional arc that you connect with patients. How do you build rapport? And

[9:14] how I tell people is how I tell my team and how I how I teach about this is like you have to teach people how to become storytellers first. If they are storytellers, they can explain to the patients what's going on with without using jargon. Because once they understand the what, now we got to wrap them around to understand how we do that. And that's part of building rapport. Storytelling. It's like when you go buy a bottle of wine. Here in the states, we have salame and they will sell you on the tera, you know, of the essence of where the berries coming from. like, oh, when you

[9:45] taste it, it tastes like black coran and something like that, you know, like and you just get so sold on it that all of a sudden you're like, I'll take a case of that. That sounds amazing. Then you're like, whoa. But you already were so connected with what's going on. You didn't even look at the value. You didn't even excuse me, you didn't even look at the cost because you saw you had trust, rapport with the person. That's that's where storytelling comes in. Then after that, they built value in it. They didn't talk about like we're going to do a surgical guide, a CT scan. No, they

[10:16] built value and the importance of the replacing of the tooth, which by that time you understood the long-term value of everything. So then you were now sold on it and now the patient automatically enrolls for the pat for the treatment. So where does AI play in this? Based on these things, I literally use a special little recording device. It's called Plaude PLA. >> I just got mine last week. I literally just got mine last week. like this is this is first off there's only one other uh friend of mine that's on a mastermind that's on the mastermind with a bulletproof that I'm actually working with him and we're doing a cross analysis we're two different offices I'm

[10:47] a PO fee for service he's fee for service only and we are doing like a big data group study and we are using it to train our team members in handoffs and everything and the whole idea is can you train people up to be storytellers so my whole analogy is I believe we are too quick to judge and say Next, I got to get the next person instead of if they have the right character, they fit our core values. Nobody under everybody thinks selling is a bad word. Right? Listen, we sold each other so that we

[11:17] can communicate on a podcast. At the end of the day, we sell our family, we sell our wives, we sell our kids. It's all about training on how we get to that point to get the person to enroll in whatever it is. So, with all the data that I collect from all the different presentation hands off, cuz I just press boom, turn it on. Then at the end of the day, I transfer it all to chat GPT and every bi-weekly now what I'm starting to do now now that I have about a month of data the arc of all the problems that it's constantly seeing I'm creating training programs every two weeks to do

[11:48] with a general team to then to start building that storytelling. So just to just to make it really tangible for those uh dentists who just are almost like scared of AI and whatnot, right? So a plow like you said is this device that you you can like a lapel you can stick on. I'm literally just opened mine recently unboxed it. I'm already heavy in AI in terms of how I write my notes and stuff. >> That's one that's one way we're doing it. >> We'll talk about what you're using and what not and what I'm using. Um, you're using it for uh analysis and data uh analysis to measure how good you are in

[12:19] terms of uh storytelling, not just you but the entire team. And you have a metric. Okay, that's our northstar. You know, storytelling and bringing value to your patients and how you communicate. That's wonderful. But you the the plaude transcribes and then you take that transcription to chat GPT and then chat GPT already has that prompt you spoke about which it knows what it's looking for specific to what you said and it kind of gives you a score. Am I have I got this right? >> You got that 100%. But here's and here's the here's the catch. I don't I just don't transcribe. Transcription does not

[12:49] give you enough. Why? Transcription does not give you tone and clarity. Does not give you emotional connection. It does not give you the emotions a patient will give you when they are scared or it doesn't give you fight or flight. So I transcribe and it's real quick transcribe and put audio in. So based on how I have the whole program set up, which is real quick, boom, boom, boom. Hey, I want to set this up. Hey Atlas, I call my mine atlas. We'll have a whole conversation of how can I set this up based on XYZ's parameters I like to set up. And then I start inputting everything and I give it little information. This patient didn't enroll

[13:20] or this patient did enroll, but how can we change? what nuances can change and how can we keep on pushing towards our north star and then we create analysis for each team member because it it remembers the name and then what is the biggest metric to evaluate how the training is going treatment plan acceptance. How do you go cuz this is a you know treatment plan acceptance is a very very broad number depending on the practice you're talking to. If you're doing drill fill bill, just simp simple fillings and especially, you know, if

[13:52] you're doing even silver fillings, I don't know where they're doing, then you're definitely in your insurance, you're definitely going to get 100% enrollment cuz insurance fully covers it covers that. But if you are doing heavy comprehensive aligners, implants, veneers, all onx, you are doing a plethora of treatment in your armamentarium and you are talking about how a patient to get them into the optimum stage of health once you've broken down what they're looking for. These treat [clears throat] plans add up real fast with several stages. So you could see somebody that's just doing

[14:23] drill fill bill be at 90% acceptance. You can see somebody that is a heavy aligner office, heavy implant office be within the 35%. So how do you take that office to get to 45 50%. It's going to be now how do you story tell? How do you convey to the patient and how do you how do you get the person that wasn't born a natural soccer player to become better than the average training? That's how most players are. Most players weren't born with a gift. They were born with grit and want.

[14:54] >> Everybody has it. So how do you turn that on? And the only way to do that is by constant analysis and then knowing their traits like and figuring out their ticks, what motivates them and then empowering that. So essentially if I was to to grossly simplify it, the the first way of using AI that you've discussed is is is wonderful and essentially it is auditing relentlessly auditing and a feedback loop to make sure that you are striving towards better and better communication with the end goal of better conversion. Like you said, sales is cons and sales and conversion. These

[15:24] terms are often perceived as being dirty, but essentially you could have the best dentistry in the world. But if your patients aren't aren't taking it and your preps are great, you look after your patients well. If they're not taking it, that's a disservice. You know, if the patient actually benefit their health, benefit their appearance, all those things, but then they're going to the office down the road because you were not able to communicate effectively. Right? So I'm just trying to basically convert those some people who who just see all these kind of themes that we're discussing as perhaps dirty that actually these are important not only for our business and keeping our staff happy and having a profitable business but in making sure that you

[15:56] actually make an impact in the world. >> Exactly. And that's that's the whole thing like at the end of the day the most important thing we all get caught up in treatment plan acceptance and and sales and all this stuff but at the end of the day it's patient care. It's putting the patient first. That's what we all talk about. Like at the end of the day everything we're doing is to put the patient care first as if it was our own. And patients don't understand if it was a boil on their hand that they saw that was getting worse and worse, they would go to dermatologist right away. But since it's inside their mouth, they don't see it, they don't feel it, they don't have any issue. You know, I think you're trying to sell me on something.

[16:27] You get that push back. So that's that's one aspect of AI. How do we, you know, part of the storytelling is having the tools. So a good storyteller will have excellent tools. Why? because they're able to now imprint what they're trying to what they're trying to trying to sell you on which is the story and the mindset. So one of the AIs we use which was an we were early onset and enroller of is X-rays. So using overjet and the reason is like remember we talked about how do you train up the soccer player? Part of that is giving them tools so they can see what we're seeing.

[16:58] >> You know when we're talking about X-rays like unless you've been trained extensively on it you're not going to pick it up. So part of that is like, okay, how can I get the person that either didn't go through a dental school, that didn't go through assisting school and they were training in the office, how can I get them to look at an X-ray, and if a patient asks them a question, be like, "Yeah, there's a cavity there." It's subjective. We still need to get the doctor to verify it, but objectively, this X-ray is giving you over a thousand uh secondary, you know, over a thousand

[17:28] recommendations of like if you went to go see a thousand different dentists. So, it's one of those first early onsets we brought in that really helped with treatment plan acceptance, but also really grow our team in the sense of getting a a lot of um gusto and wanting to talk to people in the sense of like having that confidence because now it's not like they're looking at it and it's no longer subjective. They're like, "Oh, wait. Yeah, I did see that spot. All right. Yeah, it was there. I'm not going crazy. I know I'm not a doctor." And of course, it comes down to the doctor to finally give the the diagnosis and stuff

[18:00] like that. But it always helps having that conversation prehand because when they hear it from your team, let's be honest, who do they trust more? You really trust your team? Cuz most of the time they think you're trying to upsell them. You walk out as a doctor and be like, "Yeah, you know, that toothy has got a big cavity on it. We're going to have to probably do a root canal." You walk out, they look at the assistant. Do I really need a root canal? What what the heck is what the hell is what are they talking about? And then you see the X-ray and it's like, well, look at that. See that big red spot right there? That there's a spot, you know, we >> test overjet because I I I know about pearl and so maybe isn't as established.

[18:32] So basically it takes your black and white radioraphs and sometimes you can have a huge you know mo carries radio lucency and you point it with your finger on the on the TV screen and they're like squinting and they're like and it's obvious to you cuz you you've seen a million of these right and so you're really your cuties are wonderful when it comes to this but I noticed that patients like wait okay I'll take your word for it kind of thing but recently I had a pneumthorax spontaneous humthorax my left lung chest X-ray and then this AI thing pops up showing it and I was like oh that's pretty cool and so that may be really understand, okay, this is

[19:02] what our patients think when when it just it comes up in pretty colors because it's a communication aid. It's like when you take an intraoral camera photo, it just gives you another data point and validates what what we're seeing and communicates what we're seeing. So, it's so funny that you brought that up. So, in the medical field, part of this is you start following what's going on and what are the advancements. So, in the medical field, it's become super uh proprietary and not proprietary, but it's been it's been something that all the offices or hospitals are enrolling here. Why? Because so that way they can just increase the standard of care. They can make sure things aren't being missed.

[19:34] Why? Because radiologists might, you know, only way to learn is like how we do consistent exposure. It's all about like how do you get good playing a game, bro? It's all about reps, man. How many times you swing at a ball? How many times you keep uh kicking? So the more exposure, that clinical experience, they start seeing more. Well, this already has thousands and thousands of hours of clinical experience. So they're using that to re-evaluate every diagnosis and make sure that patients are being treated properly. So in the field with Overjet and Pearl, they're very similar.

[20:04] Um we went with Overjet just because we really like the program. At the end of the day, we also have that same availability with Overjet. So when you sign when you log in, boom, Morning Huddle pops up and it's like, "Hey, here are all the patients you are seeing today." based on treatment plans that are in your PMS. This is the stuff that we should look at because subjectively there could be stuff missing here. Missing gum disease, which is the number one reason for lawsuit in the United States of America. It's improper improper diagnosing a gum disease. You know, the good old bloody proy. That

[20:36] being said, cavities, early stages of decay, you know, all these all these little nuances. >> Quite classically, David, it's it's like the second distal of a second mer of the upper. and you're looking at the and that's a classic one even in my career you look back and think ah you know what it wasn't so clear but now a few years later it's become bigger and when you look back as ah yes it was there but it was so difficult to spot and that's one reason I like the idea of of using something like overjet for example it it helps the clinician it's on the clinician side but also it's helping to tell a visual story to the patient

[21:06] >> yeah and at the same time it also helps with training like there's so many different aspects like I use it a lot for training we enroll an a new we enroll a new hygienist into the is, you know, 30 60 90 is very intense because our goal is not to have somebody wait for 3 years to get to where we want them to be. Ours is 90 days. If you can't get to 70% of where we need you to be and, you know, hey, we're going to either have to re-evaluate or if you can't get there and you're just not that type of person, then okay, this is not a cultural fit >> cuz then we got to protect the team.

[21:37] >> Hello YouTube Patrusi. I know you're watching on YouTube and I hope you're enjoying this episode so far, but I wanted to highlight in case you don't know yet, we have an amazing viewing experience on protrusive.app, our website, our network, our platform. So, I just want to spend a minute to show you what this looks like. On the left side, you see the navigation and when you join the app, you get a 1 minute video tour of the entire network. Now, in terms of where the magic happens, that's in the Protrusive community cuz you might come for the content, but you'll stay for the community of the

[22:07] nicest and geekiest dentists in the world. We have all these polls. We have a chat group. There's always active chats and dentists helping dentists. And really, what I wanted to do is create a really supportive environment that's not like the environment we have on Facebook. And it's built on the values of niceness and geekiness. If you are nice and geeky, you belong here. Now, to make this a safe space, we have a manual process of approval. We actually verify that you are a dental professional before you get in here. So, we have hundreds of applicants a day. So, if

[22:38] it's been about 2 days and you haven't heard anything, either something's in your junk or you need to reach out. If you're still waiting to join your tribe, email marie protrusive.co.uk. That's m a r i protrusive.co.uk and she'll investigate what's happened. Now, all the videos you have on YouTube are also on here, but you actually have some extra ones for free that you don't have on YouTube. So, you get some bonus content that's not on YouTube. And actually, for the future, I'm not taking things out of YouTube, but some things are not appropriate for the wider public. And I want to sort of safeguard

[23:09] that information, which is like dentist talk, if you like. So, that's why a lot of the content is only here and not on YouTube. So, you're kind of missing out if you're not on here. That's why I'd love for you to join there. And if you join one of our paid plans, then what you get is access to the CE quiz like this one and you can get CPD or CE certificates and also you get our premium notes. So these are a great aid memoir or revision for an episode to really cement your learning. And whilst we have ads and YouTube places ads on YouTube, we don't have that on our network. So for the paid plan, you get to see all of the premium notes without

[23:40] any of the ads. And of course, you get to support Team Protrusive and help us to continue what we're doing. I'm just going to gloss over the protrusive vault which has all our infographics and downloadables. These are all our master classes at this moment in time and we're always planning to add more. And if you look at there's about 1, two, three, there's about seven of them. But actually if you look at the replay section, some of the live master classes that I've done and some of the training that people pay for on other websites is all on there included as part of the masterclass subscription. And if you're a student, don't fear. We have a special section for you with all the student

[24:11] notes which anyone can access. So for example, here is one on Exodia. So, it's all there waiting for you on Protrusive Guidance. Please head over to the website which is protrusive.app, make an account on your browser. This could be Safari, Chrome, however you want to do it. And once you've made your login, then you can download the iOS or Android app and then log in through there. So, the reason to make the subscription primarily on the website first is that you get access to a free trial, which you don't get if you just make an account on Android, iOS. If you make it on the website, you get access

[24:41] to the free trial and you get our best price if you sign up through protrusive.app. So, our best deals and free trials are only on protrusive.app. Of course, we always put the link below in the description and thank you so much for enjoying our videos on YouTube. But it's now finally time to level up your experience. Back to the episode. >> That's a Khan way, man. That's I love that because it's like patients who look after themselves and they put their cuz we know what perio is, right? Yes. a huge genetic component. But when a patient look after them looks after themselves and they show buy in and then

[25:11] they value their healthare, those are the best patients to treat, right? They're the best cases for the future implants, future cosmetic stuff. And I love that way of thinking, David, >> without a doubt. And so one of the things you have to protect, you have to just not just protect the patients, but you got to protect your team. you get the wrong person in that doesn't value anything that's being done, doesn't value care or health, they're not going to take on to the enrollment of what the office culture is, which then brings down the care for the patients. So, you got to protect them. So, with the program, like we could literally go over, hey, look, you know, this is what's going on with the perio. This is

[25:42] what's going on here. There's bone loss here. You know, it's no longer subjective. Was it a three that you probed or two? Do I need to go back and check? when I can just look at it on the program and be like, "Oo, that's five millimeter bone loss there. It's a lot of attachment loss and we're talking about and then of course with scans and everything be like misalignment, group function. Are we sure we're talking about just a regular proy, you know, and photos he has no recession?" I think there might be pretty sure there's a very active pocket going on there. So, you know, of course, I'm not judgmental

[26:14] in front of a person, but it allows us to like, okay, let's reevaluate. How can we do it? Because, you know, easy way to break somebody down is be over their shoulder every 5 seconds. Like, you're doing this wrong. You're doing this wrong. Micromanaging them at the same time helping benefit the patient. So, that's one of the one of the really good little side pocket tools that we have for AI. That's an easy start for enrollment for new offices or just general dentist and period. >> Sounds great. And then, so I'm really intrigued by notes, right? So, >> I've gained back so many hours, right, in terms of notew writing. Now, I I I've

[26:46] I'm using about two ways at the moment. There's um digital digital TCO and there's dental audio notes I'm using at the moment. Now, I've got the plow. The plow when I bought it actually came up as a Facebook ad and it suggested it was had this module for healthcare. So, you haven't mentioned whether you're using the plow to actually write your notes for you. >> I haven't. Basically, what I do with my notes, I just put it through chatg. I have a subprompt that just created for my like my new patients of how the algorithm is on the the note and I'll just record it on pod and then I'll just drop it into chat GPT at the end of the day. I just boom boom boom or my

[27:17] aesthetic consults and I've been just doing that and I just drop it into my PMS cuz no matter what whatever you unless a program connects straight to your PMS you're still dro dragging dropping and putting in. So my whole thing is like how can I do everything without having a million subscriptions because it also starts adding up. Y. >> Hey guys, this is Jazz interfering here with a reminder that if you're not using AI notes already, you are absolutely wasting time. You're wasting your life away. You're wasting precious time away from your family and all your hobbies

[27:47] staying at the clinic late after everyone leaves to try and get everything watertight. And you know how there's like two types of people, right? There's those people who have got like 20 miles of range left on their car and they be like, "Yeah, I'll be fine." and those other group of people who've still got like you know half the tank full or half the charge and they're already thinking about oh where where am I going to stop to refuel now in the same way with dental notes I found two different types of dentists dentist one who will want to make sure that every aspect of their notes is absolutely perfect and so they're the ones who labor over it and

[28:19] stay behind and tinker and edit and make sure that everything is just spoton that's really draining the other type of dentist who does the bare minimum and occasionally might miss the opportunities right notes and it genuinely is the least favorite thing in the world for this dentist. Like even dentist one hates it, but dentist number two is struggling to make time for it. Both these dentists will benefit from using AI to write their notes. I also used AI to write my letters for me. Now, I've done some review videos last year comparing some of the main AI note takers out there. And you know that I

[28:50] love digital TCO. When they initially introduced it, they introduced jazz mode, which is basically it listens to the entire consultation and it writes your notes for you. Thank you Kevin for listening to me and building that feature into it. Now it's just called exam notes. But I like the fact that we as Petrusati had a role to play now because we helped Kevin to develop what digital TCO has become today. He gives you a very generous discount. You get four weeks free trial and you get their lowest pricing. There's no other discount code available for digital TCO. Give it to you at the low rate that

[29:20] Protrusive listeners get it for. If you want for this discount to auto apply, head over to protrusive.co.uk/ k/notes. You'll know you're in the right place cuz at the top it will say, "Hey, you're getting the best discount cuz you're a protrusive listener." And I promise you, you just need to check it out. And I promise you, once you get stuck in, you will drastically save time. So monthly fee is actually really cheap considering how many hours you will save every day, every week, every month. Also, if you write letters to your patients, it's just brilliant for that. Now, there are some more nuances and stuff. So, come and join us on the app to discuss that.

[29:51] But I highly encourage you to make this the year that you make the jump to AI notes and you're still in control. You still check the notes, you still edit and stuff, but now at least you've got everything down seamlessly without your nurse stressing about getting everything down and without you having to stress. It allows you to give your everything to the patient. That's protrusive.co/notes. This is an affiliate partnership with Digital CCO. But if you prefer to play full price, be my guest. But if you want the discount, which is the affiliate link, head over to protrusive.co.uk/notes. Let's get back to the episode. like we use, you know, using blog which is like

[30:23] the lower tier but one of the one that's pushing a lot of the big changes and it's just a recorder device. That's it that ties into chat GPT. We're using AI and the X-rays which you talked about overjet. And then we're also using for phone calls, you know, it's all about training, right? How do we calibrate our team, which is there's two types of training, active training and on the job training. Which is the one that's going to give you the best results? It's going to be the active in active training. Like you're not waiting for somebody to learn the ways of the office within 3 years, which could be sitting by Becky

[30:53] that has terrible mannerisms, terrible office culture, and this is the person that's training. No, we need to we need to scale that. So, one of the things we do is we use AI for phone calls. We use it's called patient prism and we have it pretty much set up where how you agree a call, how you answer, like what are you saying and it basically will rate each communication and give positive feedback, negative feedback, loops of how you change things and then >> suggestions, right? Like to what to do next time. Okay. >> Yes. And suggestions. And we use this just for new patients, not for every single patient. That would just, you

[31:24] know, we see about se 600 patients a month. That' be a little overload. So that way then they can look back at it and be like, "Oh, you know what?" Because at the end of the day, we all go back to our reset. And a reset takes time to reset. Takes about six to nine weeks consistent to build a a great um a foundation, but until that foundation is set like a rock, it breaks down. So you're always like resetting every six weeks. So it will be and every and and we see that with the with the recordings every six weeks or the suggestions, they start changing. Okay, we got we've

[31:55] started connecting with the patient here, but then we forgot to do this tangible actionable item like, hey, let's get your email or let's uh let's book the next appointment. You get so caught up on certain things. Okay, I'm going to get your insurance and I'll call back like, oh, that was a big mistake there. Let's start changing little things. So, the beauty of it is one of the biggest things with offices is we have so many people doing so many different things, but how do we how can we get accountability of everything that's being done? And that's where AI now becomes that little little backdoor pocket that that's very helpful. And it

[32:25] also allows us to help your all the office practice managers with because at the end of the day, why do we bring in an office manager? We as the doctors and the owners are seeing patients. And if we're not, we're training associates or we're training our team so that way we could scale them so they can grow and help us, right? We can't be everywhere at once and that's what doctors try to do. So getting a good trainable practice manager that can you can scale them up to what you consider to be an office manager. That's somebody come in and change their office to what they want it to be when you're your goal is XYZ. So

[32:58] part of that is like aligning we use. So going back to the plaude, every coaching scenario that I do with our office manager record and then we go back onto it. Every time she has a coaching moment, she records it and then we come back and we sit down cuz at the same time trying to scale her so she could scale the team and it's allowed us in a short amount of time just where she's now had more more chance to delegate her own her own things instead of being leveraging me and like hey how would I handle this? How would I do this? So instead of waiting for all of these different nuances to come about in a

[33:29] shorter time, we can re we can hash out several different problems and be like, okay, this is based on this person's personality. This would be the best way to approach it based on your personality as well based on all the stuff we've saved. Which just allows us to scale our HR drastically. >> What that does, David, I'm sure you already do this, but the way you use again that data is you can create SOPs, right? Playbooks, right? And then you in terms of future hires, you've already got your data rich already and they can just jump in and align with the values of your practice because you already

[33:59] have that rich data of how you do things because you've been recording that and it's something I've been doing recently. Listen to a book, buy back your time. Have you have you? Fantastic. >> I've heard about it. I haven't I haven't read it yet. It's it's on the long list of books to read. Like my wife >> bump that up in the rank, man. That that one's amazing. And so one of the quadrants it talks about in terms of leverage is one is a delegation corner. Yes, there's so much we could be delegating but replace sometimes you know that there's something that you know that you know David you do something the best you seeing patients

[34:30] and and doing comprehensive care might be the best thing for your business but if you're stuck being a manager supervisor and all those other things a bit like you know the e-myth revisited being the manager being the entrepreneur being a technician right so what it uh allows you to to do is it allows you to replace you because you've now done loom videos you've done plowed you've done all these things you've now got a record of how things how someone can you know what would David do if they know how you do it. >> So you just said like I mean the synopsis you put there was amazing. Yeah. Like the reason why I'm saying

[35:01] this is because we do exactly what you're talking about. >> We've collected so much data that our onboarding is literally da da da loom video on how to do it. Da da da loom video on how to do it. Our whole office is QR codes everywhere for when people enroll come on and like you want to learn how to do something. Especially since we work with our uh the local uh schools next to near us with for students. I mean half of my team has come from the schools where it's like when they come in be like, "Okay, here's your packet. I assisting." No, here's your packet. You need to go through all these different areas and learn what all these different thing is. This is our

[35:32] assistant SOP. So that way you know how each cassette is put together. You know what's disposable and what's not. And then at the same time, you know where everything is. So start going and watching all these videos. And every time they watch it, we were like, "Click, click, click." We see it going through checklist. A digital checklist goes through and then we're able to be like, "Okay, where does X go?" Because I always say when the students come in, it's like first to get it is the first to want it or excuse me, the first to want it is the first to get it is the first assist. That's it. This way patients care is everything. And we do things very differently here. It's all

[36:02] patiententric. Some places is just drill pill. when you're trying to put, you know, a Ritz Carlton level of experience for the patients that they're changing their mindset just like all of us are trying to do really at this level that if we're listening to these podcasts, we're trying to do next level dentistry, which means next level experiences. That means you have to protect that. So, you have to train that from the get- go cuz nobody has like think of right now, I don't know how it is where you are, but here at customer service, like there is no such thing because nobody has to work for their tip. They just, you know, you

[36:33] go to a coffee shop and before you even pay, they're already flipping over and be like, "Go ahead and sign there, please." And it's already like highlighted at 20% tip. Be like, "Yeah, I'm going to flip this back and put no on that. I just came to I I walked here and I just would like the cup to put my coffee in. I'm not going to give you a 20% tip for that." So, it's just one of these another tool to help train. And actually with the loom videos, a little tip I would give to all the doctors here, talk set up a set up a system with your treatment plan coordinators or your patient care coordinator, whoever is the one that presents when patients are

[37:05] stumbled and there's a lot of complexity, make them a loom, make them a personal loom video and send it to them. If it's a smile consultation, make it and put the smile consultation in it. Do a little like a smile mockup real fast. You will see a rapid enrollment. We do a lot of aligner cases here. And so when patients get to the aligner section after we call the four phases of health. Phase one is gums. Phase two is fillings. Phase three is alignment. Phase four is implants. And we break it down for that understandment for the patient. Once they get to phase three, they're usually like what do I do? And then all right, so they didn't enroll.

[37:35] I'll send them the video. My team follows through. They're right back at it. Why? Because they're getting the value once again. And we did that whole arc. And now because you made a personal, the doctor is sending them a personal video with all of their information, their photos, looking at their CT scan and everything, that is the pinnacle of healthcare. So right away, >> they love that David when I've done it and I cycle through their photos be intraoral DS and just talk over it. Hey, so good to see you. This was the issue. So based on your goals, here's recommendations. Here's what it looks like on someone else. You're showing

[38:05] them examples or social proof. I agree with you loom not only for SOPs but in terms of a wonderful way to communicate to patients and thing is patients when you tell them everything at the chair and you put it in writing those are two different mediums they forget what they told them in the chair some people don't resonate with what's written some personalities do obviously whereas when you do this video they're immediately able to show their spouse they're able to show their cousin and then people like oh wow this is so cool my dentist doesn't do that it already sets you apart >> and at the end of the day you just said it like speaking to the spouse when you

[38:36] have a very, you know, you have a very strong family union unit. They usually, every family unit is going to have a cost, a fund, a number amount that they will have to speak to their fellow partner before they say yes. Me and my wife have our own number. And I don't care what people say, there's always something because if not, then they really don't have a marriage. It's two different people living two different lives. So when you're seeing that many patients, you know right away like, okay, and there's a hesitant, you know, hey, look, why don't we either a schedule you to come in with your spouse or you know what, let's make you

[39:08] something special this way cuz when you're going to go home, there's going to be so much data we've talked about and we really want to highlight what are the key things that you're you came in talking about. You know, the confidence in being able to chew and eat, not being afraid of something breaking one day when you're out like it's happened to you and, you know, highlighting like the key pain points. So that way when we're doing the presentation, we're always reconnecting the patient onto the emotional connection that brought them in, which was either something broke and they were afraid of it or they saw something happen and they don't want that to happen to them. So when you do that, not just like the whole thing is not to just make a video and be like,

[39:40] "Hey Jazz, this is what's going on and uh yeah, if you just straighten it out, we'll be good. All right, catch you." No. Hey, Jazz, listen. I really want to send this out because this way you can review everything we talked about. One of the key points that really stood out to me was how you really want to maintain that confident smile and you have this fear of your teeth breaking, especially when we showed you these cracks and fear of how that one time when you're eating some soup, all of a sudden that tooth broke. Well, look, it's because of the misalignment. Teeth aren't functioning properly cuz they're not fitting properly. If we do that and

[40:11] put them in the right place, they still have a chance of breaking. They always will, but now it's like car tires. You buy tires to get 40,000 miles out of them. If they are aligned and you don't race, you can get 40,000 miles. But if they're misaligned, you won't get the life out of it. Same thing with te like you get that that emotional connection, the storytelling with it. You're giving that, you know, that the >> analogy is your analogy. >> Analogy. Thank you. So that's the whole idea. So using all these different things and plus having these videos,

[40:42] it's a great um it's a backup or training program for treatment plan presenters, future associates. Now you have all this data that when you bring somebody else into your practice, look, this is what didn't enroll. This is what enrolled. This level of connection, this level of disconnection, this is what's helped. So, it's having these different programs sounds like a lot of work, but it just helps build the business because now you have something to stand out because Pearson's law simply states a very important thing. Data that's

[41:13] measured, data that's quantified is data that changes. It's all about data, not about feeling. >> You've done a really lovely overview. I'm very impressed with the way that you run your practice. I think there's a lot of inspiration, a lot of nuggets. I think very few percentage of our listeners are operating at that level and I think some will be inspired to take action. Some will be inspired to just look at their current processes and audit and re re-evaluate and think where are they missing the data. So I think there's so many takeaways and of course you mentioned uh the software such as overjet um how using cloud and chat GPT

[41:43] I think there's enough to take away for everyone here. So that was fantastic. Two two things I want to ask you. The second thing I'll ask you is how we can learn more from you. Tell us more about your podcast etc and all that kind of stuff. But the first question I want to ask you is a lot of colleagues probably the number one question we get when we talk about AI is is this I know in the states you have HIPPA here we have GDPR etc. Is this is this halal? Is this kosher? Is this HIPPA? Is this everything? How do we manage this uh data security minefield? So it's the same thing like DS core. DS core is same thing like Ivacar where everything goes

[42:14] up into the cloud. All of these proprietary ones are protected. It's like grock gets so much proprietary information. It is a protected. So one of the things is like your your information you're putting in. You're not putting in all of the patients information. So it's not getting social security. It's not getting full names. It's not getting all this data. So, it is protected. Now, what I recommend going into AI and putting all of your patients information, no, at the end of the day, we're always just using first names. So, that's one thing right away that just boom, chat, GPT, you are good. When it comes to using AI like overjet

[42:46] and all these things, all that stuff's protected. Same thing with like patient prison. Like, if they get hacked and first off, they're the ones that are going to you are signing up with them. So there's a big disclaimer on the bottom that like it's all protected and everything and if not then it's it falls right back onto them. So it's one of those things like who you're signing up with depending on what you're doing the due diligence on data protection so that way you are protected especially here in the states man you don't want to mess with that >> it's very strict there I agree from from speaking to my colleagues and so David how can we learn more from you you know I've really enjoyed your style of

[43:17] presentation your communication skills are are fantastic in terms of what you have to teach and share I think it's very inspirational for those people who are struggling I mean I hate the word convert but storytelling people who are some dentists are struggling they blurt out the diagn nosis and they talk to their patient like they're a dentist. That's like the biggest sin. But the way you few examples you gave were absolutely wonderful. How can we learn more from you my friend? >> Yeah definitely. So first off I am a bulletproof coach with mastermind. Uh so it's going to be the bulletproof podcast mastermind. I'm on a couple of their podcasts as well. You could reach out

[43:48] through there or you could join our group. I'm on their on their website all the time answering questions. So I'm pretty much there all the time just spitballing different ideas. So, if you join their uh their group page, just go to their website, bulletproof mastermind podcast, and then you could join their page and always talking there. You can follow me on Instagram, which is going to be Midtown Tennel FL. I'm always on there. I run our office Instagram and social media and everything. So, always connecting with people. I just do it cuz I love helping people. That's the thing. They were there to help me cuz three years ago, I was all clinical. E-Myth

[44:19] and the right books, being with around the right group changes that. I don't have my own podcast. I jump on different podcasts to spread information just because the idea is we subject ourselves to this lone wolf mentality and the more we unite we can protect ourselves, protect our patients and at the same time protect ourselves from burnout. It's one of the biggest things that happens with dentists and that's one of my goals is to really help change that. >> Well, it was an absolute pleasure to share your messages and your experiences and all the different wonderful innovative ways that using AI. Thank you for bringing value to the thousands of Patricati and from us. Thank you very

[44:50] much David. >> Thanks Jazz. Have a great one. >> Thank you. Well, there we have it guys. Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end. Now is the time to look at AI. Look at all the softwares that Dr. Amador discussed. Hopefully, it's given you some ideas on different clever uses of AI. Do not be afraid. Be careful. Be judicious, but do not be afraid. It can really save you a lot of hours. My friends, this episode is about recordkeeping and therefore it's eligible for CPD and CE credits. We are a PACE approved education provider. Make

[45:20] sure you're watching this on Protrusive Guidance, our platform. Scroll down and answer the quiz. If you're not already in our community, head over to protrusive.app. You're going to absolutely love it there. It's our little Protrusive family, the nicest and geekiest [music] dentists in the world. If you enjoy our podcast, make sure you've hit that subscribe button and I will catch you same time, same place next week. Bye for now. Heat.

[45:51] [music]
