# Personal Finances for Dentists - Career Security, Investing & Your Rich Life - IC068
videoId: 4OXruGIdb_g
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4OXruGIdb_g
duration: 48:08
publishedDate: 2026-02-23
publishedTimeText: 1 month ago

[0:00] personal finances. Let's talk money. Let's talk career security. Welcome back, Patricia. I'm Jazz Galati and this is a rare solo episode. Honestly, as a podcaster, it's so much easier to talk to someone and just have a conversation like you're at a pub somewhere and it's just an easy flow. When I do these solo ones, they take a lot out of me. But I really wanted to just [gasps] blah let it all out. I think money and personal finances is one of two rabbit holes that we all should go down and learn more

[0:32] about. The other one is your health and well-being. So, I'm currently in the health and well-being rabbit hole. I'm taking more supplements now than ever before. I'm going to the gym a lot more than ever before. So, if you ask me right now, I'm all about longevity. I'm following a lot of Brian Johnson kind of stuff, how to optimize your sleep and all that good stuff. But some years ago, I went down the rabbit hole of money and personal finances, and I think it's one that we all ought to go down. Now, in this episode, I'm going to share my values when it comes to money, my own beliefs and perspectives when it comes

[1:03] to financial security and money and how I think it applies to dentists. So, if you've already done your research and you know about money and investing and ISAs and Roth IAS and stocks and shares and that kind of stuff, then great. A lot of this stuff is just making it applicable to dentists and hopefully a lot of validation. And of course, it may be that we have different opinions. I'm fairly riskaverse, but it may be that you've never really read anything about money and personal finances before. And so, this will be quite educational for you. But I have to say that everything I'm saying today is not financial

[1:34] advice, guys. I am just a dentist who went down a rabbit hole essentially about saving money, the power of compound interest, projecting how much money you need to actually retire and something called your rich life, which I will talk a lot about towards the end of the podcast. So, I'm going to take you on a little journey. I will be talking a lot about my past because learning about my past will give you an idea about my money mindset, especially early on my career, and what I think is an achievable goal for most dentists. I will give you a summary of what I've learned from, you know, going down this rabbit hole, reading lots of books,

[2:05] listening some podcasts, although mostly actually books and audio books, and how I currently think about personal finances. And with time and the season of life I'm in now, you know, I've got two young boys, it might be very different to how I think in 10 years time. And also, if I go back 10 years ago, I was thinking differently because 10 years ago, I was in a new grad salary in the UK, which isn't very much, and I'm in a different position now, but with more liabilities, and I'll be in a different position in 10 years. So, all these perspectives and beliefs I've gathered, they change over time because you change. So, first question, why am I

[2:35] talking about money and personal finances on a dental podcast? Well, we're a podcast, but we're also a community. We're a community of the nicest and geekiest dentists in the world. I am, of course, talking about Protrusive Guidance, our own network. At the time of publishing this, we got over 6,000 dentists all over the world. And we don't make it easy to join the network cuz we need you to verify that you're a dentist. And so, a lot of people get put off by that and they don't want to join. and I get that. But we're still growing faster than ever. And I still love that the feel and the vibe of our little community is so

[3:05] pleasant. We welcome questions. There's no such thing as a stupid question. One of our core values is kindness. And so it's like the complete opposite of the experience you usually get on Facebook. And so on the community that we've built this year, we've decided to make it even more awesome and purposeful. So every month we have a theme. Now last month we did perspective and gratitude and that was January. And if I was to summarize last month in about 30 seconds, sometimes we all have bad days at work, right? And sometimes we feel that the stress is mounting up and our job is not easy, especially if you're a general

[3:36] dentist. I think general dentists, we have the hardest job of all. We have to be good at so many different things. And of course, if you wear other hats like a parent, spouse, if you have elderly parents that you're a carer of, there's so many other life stressors that we have to juggle at any one point. But when it came to gratitude and perspective, I just wanted to make uh two things clear. One is go back to when you were 17 18 years old for most of you if you're from the UK if you're in the US obviously a bit later when you decided that you wanted to go into to dental school for your postgraduate and there was a time in your life when you

[4:06] really wanted it badly like in your stomach there's nothing more that you wanted than to be sat where you are right now let me say again there was a time where you would have given up your spleen to be sat exactly where you are in your exact predicament even if you think oh my life's too stressful and I'm not enjoying it or I hate running a practice and all stressors that we have once upon a time this is the life that you wanted and sometimes that there was a lot of positive energy when I was 17 18 man I really wanted to be in dentistry I really really really badly wanted to be a dentist and so sometimes

[4:36] when I have a bad day I think to myself you know what there was once upon a time that teenage jazz would absolutely do anything to be here right now and practice gratefulness be grateful that you are here that you made it and you came through so many obstacles and you will continue to jump more obstacles so sometimes feeding off that old energy you had is really powerful And the second thing I just want to mention on perspective and gratitude is the following quote which I think is so powerful. Real luxury in life is when you don't have to deal with the police, lawyers, hospitals or doctors. You just go to work, come home, cook some good

[5:08] food, spend some time with your family, and sleep peacefully. And I think that is so true. I think social media shows this perfect life that everyone's living. And we often take for granted that special quiet life that we have right now. Especially if you're fortunate enough not to be in those scenarios. If you don't have lawyers, if you don't have hospitals in your life, you are rich, my friend, beyond belief. And it's important to keep that mindset and be grateful. So, that was a quick little summary of what I talked about last month. Uh, next month is AI. AI and density, making AI tangible for every dentist, whether you're a new grad or

[5:39] towards the end of your career. And if you think you're a total technophobe, you don't get any of this AI stuff. And on that note, as you guys know, we launched our own AI, Protrusive AI. It's called Ask Jazz just recently. And today I was on a mentoring forum with Julia, one of our members. And so she posted a case and she said, "Hi Jazz, it seems odd to be actually writing to you and not ask Jazz." I think it's absolutely amazing, mind-blowing. I use it a lot. Asking questions I would be embarrassed to ask aloud. Well, firstly, on our network, you can ask any question, guys, right? Protrusive guidance is there. There's no such thing as a stupid

[6:10] question. However, we see the questions coming in, the queries that we answer on Ask Jazz every day, and it's amazing. So, for those of you who don't know, AskJazz is our AI and it's basically built on all the podcasts we've ever done. Everything I've ever taught, everything I've spoken has been recorded, has been transcribed, and we've got about 8 to 9 million words at the moment making up our AI. And like between now and June, we're really making a conscious effort to make this what I already think is incredible AI. But I want this to be the go-to resource by June 2026. Like superseding chat GPT

[6:41] by a million times because chat GPT will scrape from articles online and Reddit and stuff. Whereas this is just the protrusive verse. What we feed it and what we like to feed it is very carefully selected sciencebacked evidence-based and experientially based because everyone in the community when there's a really good chat thread going and a good discussion about a case and I'm like, "Wow, this is epic information. And it's so difficult to find this good information about this specific scenario like how do you remove a reservoir and bridge that was one from today and so all the answers that were gathered we upload them to ask Jazz and

[7:11] so next time someone asks what's the best way to remove a resire bridge not only do you have the resource of every single episode ever and you know RBB masterclass our course but now from the community what's worked for practitioners all over the world. So I'll talk more about that as well next month. So AI is next month's theme. But back to this month, we're talking about personal finances. That really important rabbit hole I think everyone should go down. Some of the most insightful information I found from our community is how we answer the polls. We have like weekly polls quite often. We have two or

[7:41] three polls a week and they've been so rich in insight. Now I remember a time clinically I posted a scenario about how would you restore this tooth or something and the range of answers were amazing. Like some people would extract, a quarter of people would restore the crown, a quarter people would do a post call. Like it was all over the place. But it was beautiful because what it proved is let's not look at the fact that we'd all do it differently. Is that no matter if you do it differently, there's someone else who's doing it the same way as you. And a lot of these are gray areas and there are no right answers. Now, this poll was really

[8:13] insightful on personal finances. I asked as an earning dentist, are you living paycheck to paycheck or do you end up with savings at the end of the month? And guys, you would not believe it. Well, maybe you would. Okay, so what percentage do you think like in life in the world? Now, forget dentistry for a moment. Let's let's talk about everyone globally, the data we have, right? In 2025 to 2026, over half of workers globally and in the US live paycheck to paycheck, right? So, if they literally lost their job, then how will they pay for their mortgage? how will they pay

[8:44] for anything? Like they don't have a buffer, they don't have significant savings because they need that monthly income to sustain their living. It said 49% of UK workers and up to 67% of the Americans are struggling to make ends meet. And it says 72% of Gen Z and 65% of millenn millennials particularly being impacted. That's sad. That's really messed up. But tell you what's messed up. As dentists, we are generally higher earners, right? I mean no matter what country you're in, compared to the average income in your country, a dentist would earn more than most other

[9:16] professions. So our community on protrusive guidance of dentists says 45% of you were living paycheck to paycheck. You spend what you earn at the end of every month. And very often on these um Facebook groups, I see dentists posting that ah I've been stupid and I accidentally spend this money and I knew I was supposed to save a third for tax and now I have to pay tax next week and I don't have any money to pay it. I need 30 40 grand to pay my tax bill. I've seen these posts before. So if you've seen them and someone's had the courage to post that then behind the scenes

[9:47] there's a lot more happening. So why is that happening? Why is it that as high earners 45% of us as a you know as a snapshot right of our community but let's extrapolate that 45% of us are living paycheck to paycheck and not being able to save and I would love to have some data on what percentage are new grads which I understand when I was a new grad I was definitely living paycheck to paycheck you know London's not cheap now but here's the thing I was still investing massively huge I was investing 50 to 60% of my monthly salary

[10:19] Let me tell you how. I was living with my parents. I'll tell you about my living arrangement a little bit more in a minute. And therefore, supposedly saving a lot of money, but I was spending so much on me. I was investing in myself, i.e. the first paycheck I got, I spent 60% of it on my first camera. You know, I got the Ring Flash macro lens body. There's a whole funny story behind that in a different podcast. I got it from Gumree, secondhand, used, and it cost me like £1,300 at that time. It was a big deal for me. Huge deal. And so just like that, I was doing so many courses. I was

[10:51] buying new loops. I was just really investing in myself. So for me, was I really living paycheck to paycheck? Because actually I was investing. So I was able to invest in myself. So if you're in a position to have some money to invest and this could be in just a savings account, this could be in stocks and shares or this could sometimes be in yourself depending on what season of life you're in, what skill set you have, and that kind of stuff. Another insightful piece of information I would love to gain from that 45% is okay what percentage are associates and what percentage are principles. As an

[11:22] associate I used to think that hey principles are raking it in they are literally taking you know 60% of my pay and they are doing just fine but actually the more I learn the more I spend time with principles the more I made good friends with principles the more I understand that actually a lot of associates are far better off financially than principles. I was literally sat next to a principal at the recent event, the Brandon Mack event, the CE I went to on veneers. It was it was really cool. And this dentist Rahul, lovely guy, turns out we went to the same secondary school together, both Hamsler boys. And he said to me the check he writes for his associates is

[11:54] bigger than the check he writes to himself every month. And this is not the first time I've heard that. Principles tell me that quite often. Now, pros and cons, right? It's stressful to run a business. There's lots of overheads. All the costs from PPE to staffing, annual pay rises, etc. have gone much higher and so the principles are feeling it, practices are feeling it. But the plus side of all that is that you get to run the show that you want to. You get to be the boss and if you play your cards right and build nice systems and build like you know recurring stream of patients and revenue for the practice,

[12:25] then that could be your retirement. That could be your exit plan. I know plenty of principles in their 50s who sold to a corporate and now they're smiling because a lot of their financial issues have gone. That was their big exit. And so you have that benefit which you don't as an associate. you're not building something at least not through the practice. But I just wanted to mention that because the whole thing about associates and principles overall when we look at the data when we look at the accountants data when we look at the NASDAQ data on average principles will earn way much more than associates but it's not true for everyone and for a lot of associates they will do better than their principal and a lot of principles

[12:56] have told me that. So regardless of associate or principal why are so many dentists living paycheck to paycheck? Well, I think part of it is uh you have this status. You're a dentist and therefore you have high income. You also have high taxes in most countries. Taxes are very high in the UK especially. Yep. Super high. And so yes, whilst you're earning more, there's this kind of like famous quote that you work from January to April just to pay your taxes kind of thing, right? And the rule of thumb we have in the UK at least is that you should save a third of your income to pay tax. So whilst we're high earners,

[13:26] we also pay a lot of tax. Now being in that higher earner kind of status then a lot of us who become parents might send our children to private schools and they are really expensive. And of course we want to go on holidays. You want to go on nice holidays because we're dentists, right? And so you end up going on holidays on the most expensive time of year which is when the other schools are off as well. And you choose nice holidays in nice resorts because you're a dentist. You deserve it. And so high earnings, high tax, school fees, keeping up with the Joneses, driving that nice car, etc., etc. These are all reasons

[13:56] why despite being well- paid, a dentist may feel that they're living paycheck to paycheck. Now, all this while, for example, a principal might be living paycheck to paycheck, but building the value and goodwill of their practice. So, once the kids are a bit older and the kids have been funded to university or college, and now that expense is gone, then they have a bit more breathing room and suddenly there's a practice sale around the corner and now it's off to the Bahamas. I'm not sure if that's actually how it works, but in my associate mind, that's could be a business model of a principal. But one thing for sure is that we all can be

[14:26] guilty of this. And this is lifestyle creep. Lifestyle creep is as your income goes up, your spending also goes up to match it. Like you earn a bit more, you've been in the game for a few years and now you might buy that BMW. And then kids come along and you think, okay, we need to upgrade our house and then you might really stretch to buy the biggest house you can afford. So rather than buying a modest house that will make you comfortable, we like to think, okay, let me buy the biggest house that we can potentially get a mortgage on. And now your mortgage bill is really high every month. And so there we are. There's no

[14:56] saving. And I haven't even mentioned about the cost of indemnity and GDC or your APA or whatever. There are a lot of costs in just associated with being a dentist. So lifestyle creep is a real thing and something that I think you should, you know, introspectively look at look in the mirror and think hm has lifestyle creep affected me now a little bit. I understand because you need to enjoy your life as well. And we'll come on to that. There's something about living a rich life. Once again, I've teased it again. I'll come to that. and we need to have fun and be able to spend our hardearned money. But I always say be very careful with lifestyle creep

[15:28] because it goes against one of the philosophies that I will talk about shortly, which is just maximizing your savings rate and for good reason. And we'll talk about that now. On the app, I get inspired by so much of you and your thoughts and where you are in your career. And one of you, I won't say your name, I won't embarrass you. You mentioned this concept of denser being golden handcuffs, which is like highlevel employment. like it's paid well but if you're not there inside patients mouths you're not getting paid. Even if you're a principal then unless you are giving a lot of energy and time

[15:58] then your practice will not perform very well. If you haven't done the hard work to build the systems and keep thinking about the next step and marketing and fighting the fires then you'll be stuck. And so yeah great densry has a high income capability but it's those golden handcuffs. You can't just suddenly take a foot off the brake and still have the same amount of money coming in. Now, yes, I know there's like den plan, practice plan, there's like plan based income, and I get that. But for most of us, if you take a few weeks off, if you take a month off, you will feel it. You will feel it in your income big time.

[16:30] And so, we have to physically be present and give ourselves and our energy and our time to be able to bring the production. And that is a form of highlevel employment. It's kind of seen as a trap. We are not free, my friends. We are trapped. It's not the worst trap in the world, but we are trapped. So, I will now share some of my beliefs on how to break free from this trap. And to understand my money beliefs, you kind of need to go back in time with me. So, I'll spend just a couple of minutes for those of you that don't know. I came to

[17:00] England as a six-year-old as a refugee. Okay? I was six. I was a refugee from Afghanistan, essentially fleeing the Taliban. I live in London, West London. lived in West I still live in West London now but a different part but the key thing is we didn't have much money and I was living in what we call social housing or affordable housing or or government subsidized housing so this was like a tiny apartment it was two bedrooms and so once my sister was born as well it was me my sister and my parents living in this two-bedroom apartment and this wasn't just for like 2 years right up until I went to uni and

[17:33] then right up until I was a year after so now I was a dentist when I came back home to live with my parents after going to Union Sheffield. I was living in this tiny apartment. I remember how uh embarrassed I was at school. I wouldn't dare invite anyone to my home because I'd been to my friends houses and they lived in proper houses, nice houses. And I lived in this little dingy flat in a slightly dodgy area. And I think I was like 16 before I ever allowed a friend to come to my place. When my dad first came to the country, he was driving a cab or a taxi and he would come home very late at night. And so a small kid

[18:05] looking at my dad, he's like, "Okay, you know, he's working really hard. He'd not be around very much in the evenings. In fact, he'd come home at 10 p.m. And so that was after my bedtime. So what that was teaching me as a kid is it's okay to sacrifice family time for work and that's what kind of maybe was subconsciously I was learning as a child. We didn't have much money. So I did think about money a lot as a kid as a teenager and I could not wait to get my first job. So I used to work in homebased which is like a a DIY garden furniture paint that kind of shop. I was on £4 an hour and I worked as many

[18:36] Saturdays as I could to have a bit of disposable income as a teenager. Then when I went to dent school at university, I worked in bars and catering at stadiums and it wasn't like an extra thing for me that I was working. I just from 16 I was working and so I was working. Working part-time employment was just a part of me. I just I just needed it. I knew that I need the money so that I could afford to have a nice student experience and be able to go out and have fun, which we did a lot of. But I needed my jobs to help me fund that. Now, here's an embarrassing story. When my wife was not my wife and she was

[19:06] my girlfriend, I remember meeting her for a coffee in the Costa. And I got there like 10 15 minutes before. And I'm forever, even to this day, now that they're married, I'm always getting ready 15 minutes before my wife. There's always two in a relationship, one who's like always on time early and one that's always late. And you know who's who now. But anyway, uh I bought my drink, probably a black Americano, and I knew Sims order. I knew what she usually orders, but I hesitated. I didn't buy it that day. And I was just sat there waiting for her with my drink. And when she came into the cafe, she was like, "Hey, where's my drink?" And I was thinking, gosh, yes, where is her drink? Why didn't I buy her a drink? Well, truth is, I didn't have enough money. I

[19:38] was really low on funds. And I kind of had to have that conversation with her then. And uh, bless her, she stuck by me. She supported me, stuck by me. And so I knew from that day that she was a keeper. So the reason I told you these stories is just to give you some context on where I come from and how that may have shaped some of my thinking about money. But I was really influenced by a lot of things I was reading. So I think in about fourth year of dent school I read uh my first ever finance book if you like and I think this is the first this is like the gateway drug to finance books for many people. This was Rich Dad Poor Dad by Robert Kiyosaki. It taught me about assets versus liabilities and

[20:10] if you haven't read this book it is one of the classics. So I think I was like 21 22 and I was reading this over the summer holidays and that book really opened my eyes. It just made these little things. It taught me a lot about me and my family and how in the book there's like there's my rich dad and my poor dad. Well, one of them is actually his dad. The other one's like a I think it was a a dad of his friends. And he looked at their two lives. And with his dad at the dinner table, talking about money was frowned upon. It was like a taboo subject. Whereas with the rich dad and his family, they talked about money openly. They talked about business ideas

[20:40] and ventures and investment and that kind of stuff. And I guess years later, revisiting these concepts for this episode, we dentists are what Robert Kaiosaki would describe as highly educated but financially undertrained. Let me say that again. We're highly educated and most of us are happy to admit and honest enough to admit that we're financially undertrained. And so once again, I'm no guru, but I'm just going to break down a few things from Rich Dad Poor Dad applied to dentistry. Number one, it was mostly like a mind, it wasn't like an investing book. It wasn't even like a very technical book.

[21:11] It was a mindset book. And essentially, there's assets and there's liabilities. Assets put money in your pocket and liabilities take money out of your pocket. So, let's make this really tangible, right? for dentists, we may wish to max out and get the most expensive house we can afford. So, uh, whatever the bank will loan you, you'll really stretch it out so that you can have that nice dentist house, but now your monthly outgoing on the mortgage is going to be huge. And we know that a lot of people view their home, their family home as an asset, but I think you would

[21:41] argue it's more of a liability. Takes money out of your pocket. Only when you sell it on maybe years, decades later, can it give you money in your pocket. But having that big house and really stretching your affordability is actually seen as a liability. Having a luxury car, watches, and even bigger practice loan, again, we think practice loan is a good type of debt, but again, it's taking money out of our pocket month by month. They feel like success, but they are liabilities dressed as status. So, I'm just going to read out some assets that might apply to a dentist. Hello YouTube Patrusi. I know

[22:13] you're watching on YouTube, and I hope you're enjoying this episode so far. But I wanted to highlight in case you don't know yet, we have an amazing viewing experience on protrusive.app, our website, our network, our platform. So I just want to spend a minute to show you what this looks like. On the left side, you see the navigation and when you join the app, you get a 1 minute video tour of the entire network. Now in terms of where the magic happens, that's in the protrusive community cuz you might come for the content, but you'll stay for the community of the nicest and geekiest dentists in the world. We have all these

[22:44] polls. We have a chat group. There's always active chats and dentists helping dentists. And really what I wanted to do is create a really supportive environment that's not like the environment we have on Facebook. And it's built on the values of niceness and geekiness. If you are nice and geeky, you belong here. Now, to make this a safe space, we have a manual process of approval. We actually verify that you are a dental professional before you get in here. So, we have hundreds of applicants a day. So, if it's been about 2 days and you haven't heard anything,

[23:15] either something's in your junk or you need to reach out. If you're still waiting to join your tribe, email marie protrusive.co.uk. That's m a r i protrusive.co.uk and she'll investigate what's happened. Now, all the videos you have on YouTube are also on here, but you actually have some extra ones for free that you don't have on YouTube. So, you get some bonus content that's not on YouTube. And actually for the future I'm not taking things out of YouTube but some things are not appropriate for the wider public and I want to sort of safeguard that information which is like dentist talk if you like. So that's why

[23:46] a lot of the content is only here and not on YouTube. So you're kind of missing out if you're not on here. That's why I'd love for you to join there. And if you join one of our paid plans then what you get is access to the CE quiz like this one and you can get CPD or CE certificates and also you get our premium notes. So these are a great aid memoir or revision for an episode to really cement your learning. And whilst we have ads and YouTube places ads on YouTube, we don't have that on our network. So for the paid plan, you get to see all of the premium notes without any of the ads. And of course, you get

[24:16] to support Team Protrusive and help us to continue what we're doing. I'm just going to gloss over the Protrusive Vault, which has all our infographics and downloadables. These are all our master classes at this moment in time, and we're always planning to add more. And if you look at there's about 1, two, three, it's about seven of them. But actually, if you look at the replay section, some of the live master classes that I've done and some of the training that people pay for on other websites is all on there included as part of the masterclass subscription. And if you're a student, don't fear. We have a special section for you with all the student notes which anyone can access. So, for

[24:46] example, here is one on Exodia. So, it's all there waiting for you on Protrusive Guidance. Please head over to the website which is protrusive.app. Make an account on your browser. This could be Safari, Chrome, however you want to do it. And once you've made your login, then you can download the iOS or Android app and then log in through there. So the reason to make the subscription primarily on the website first is that you get access to the free trial, which you don't get if you make an account on Android iOS. If you make it on the website, you get access to the free trial and you get our best price if

[25:18] you sign up through protrusive.app. So our best deals and free trials are only on protrusive.app. Of course, we always put the link below in the description. And thank you so much for enjoying our videos on YouTube. But it's now finally time to level up your experience. Back to the episode. So if you have an associate-led practice generating profit without you, that is an asset. Not so easy. My principal friends tell me that is no easy feat. Property is a big one. That's why a lot of people get into property. Having lots of property rented out. Although it depends on which country. In the UK it's uh it's becoming

[25:49] less profitable. But property is generally seen as an asset. It brings money into your pocket. Index funds which we'll talk a lot about uh later. Index funds are huge. That's my main way of gaining assets. I invest in index funds via my pension and my something called ISA in the UK. The closest thing for that in the US would be something like a Roth IRA. Another example of an asset would be having equity i.e. owning a percentage of a scalable company for example a dental tech company. So those are just a few examples and essentially your clinical skill is income but it's not an asset because it doesn't work

[26:20] without you. If you stop drilling, income stops. That, my friends, is not freedom. That is dependency. Now, we've already established that high income doesn't equal wealth. Remember the poll about 45% of us still living paycheck to paycheck even though having a high monthly packet generally compared to the population. And you can still feel financial pressure. It's very real due to the reasons I mentioned before like lifestyle creep, private education, which is so expensive, keeping up with the Joneses, high tax. And so, we have to change how we think about wealth.

[26:50] Wealth is not your income. Wealth is how many assets you have, what your cash flow is like. Having financial independence, I'm going to talk about this a lot, financial independence a little bit later. And my favorite one, which is time freedom. True wealth is doing what you want, when you want, with whom you want, whenever you want. However, in densary, we have high income, but we have big mortgages, practice loans, equipment finance, and once again, lifestyle creep. On paper, that's rich, but it's also very stressed. And so, I'm just going to wrap up Kyosaki's teaching. Essentially, it's invest first, spend later. And so, it's

[27:22] moving away that thinking from earning, spending, and then whatever's left over at the end, investing it, and flipping it. And this is something that I I actually do. I earn, I invest, and then I spend what's left over. So, don't just think about investing any money you have left over at the end of the year. An investment should be a big part of what you do. And then any money you have left over is kind of what you live on. It's not easy. And you might be thinking, "Wow, Jazz, what's the joy in life if you earn lots of money and you're not able to spend it and investing is boring. It doesn't give you pleasure now." And I get that. But remember, I

[27:53] will teach you about your rich life. And that's coming very soon. The goal that I want to really aspire to and for everyone, I would really aspire this for all the British, you practice dentistry because you want to, not because you have to. And so I've met some really inspirational dentists in their mid-50s. The kids are a little bit grown up now. and they've described to me this wonderful scenario that they work a few days a week because they want to. But the rest of the time they're enjoying life. They're doing things that truly bring joy to them. At one point, we all realize something is that the harder you

[28:23] work, the more you work, the more you have to pay tax. And so, if we can start thinking early on about how can I get to maybe 15, 20 years from now and have the option or the possibility of practicing dentistry because you want to, not cuz you have to. Think about how powerful that is. Whether a patient says yes or no to a treatment plan has no bearing on you whatsoever. And really that's something my my principal Hapgill has always taught me from day one is that whether the patient says yes or no, it really does not matter. You just treat everyone like family and present the best plan. Give them compromised options

[28:54] if they truly can't afford it. Explain the value of the plan to them. But if they say no, it's their loss. It should not affect you one bit. But when I was younger and think when you're a new grad and you want to do these fun cases and then make these nice treatment plans and patients will say no. And then as a as a new grad, you can feel really dejected. I think you don't have to be a new grad. You can be at any stage of career and that kind of rejection is not a nice thing. And that may even have financial implications. Someone you know your practice manager might go to, oh production is down. I know my American colleagues, they tell me this that oh you got to start cutting is something I've heard well secondhand a dentist

[29:25] told me that that's what their manager told them in the states. You know if you want to produce you got to do the dentistry. And so that kind of ethical pressure to not I wouldn't I wouldn't say overt treatment. I don't know anything about these patients. I can't say anything is over treatment. But it's like this level of desperation of your patients to accept treatment plans because that is tied to your income. That's not a great place to be. So the opposite is you already have assets paying money into your pocket. You're doing densry which is still going to earn you good money but you're not dependent on your patient saying yes. Can you imagine how much more relaxed you would be and having that heavy weight lifted from your shoulders? That

[29:57] my friends is what we should be aspiring to. So three reflective questions my friends. If I stop working for 6 months, right? Think about it. you just stop working for 6 months, what would happen? Number two is what assets are currently paying you? Do you have any property? Do you have any rental property paying you every month? Are you investing in index funds, stocks and shares, and over the years you've seen an increase? And are you building income or are you building freedom? Which one do you truly want? So, I hope you enjoyed that little quick summary of Rich Dad Poor Dad. And there's other books which I'll talk about in the rest of this episode. So, I'm glad I read this book because when I

[30:28] was uh one year qualified, I graduated from Sheffield and I went back to London. I had my foundation job and once again I was living with my parents in that same flat we've been there that means we've been in this uh apartment for 17 years now still tiny two-bedroom in fact going to dent school and going to uni was the first time I had my own bedroom and so live my parents was great because I saved a lot of money that I was able to invest now here's the thing I wasn't investing in property I wasn't investing uh in stocks and shares at that point didn't really know much about it that comes later in the story but I

[30:58] was investing in myself so for example I went on loads of courses is. And in my first paycheck, like I said, I bought my camera setup. Now, I see a camera in densry as an asset. It puts money in your pocket. Now, yes, I had that initial outlay of spending that £1,300 or so, which is a huge chunk of my first paycheck. But practicing photography elevated me as a clinician. It helped me to build my portfolio, helped me to eventually get into private practice, and I just wouldn't practice densry without it. On the days that I take more photos, they're more joyful. Now obviously nowadays I'm I'm more into

[31:29] video over the last 3 four years but I'm just stating the obvious for you guys which you know already if you listen to this podcast is dental photography is absolutely essential. So I saw that as an asset. I saw the courses I was going on as an asset because they would all increase my scope increase my skills that would ultimately give me a higher monthly pay. And this happened year on year on year my monthly pay went up and up and up. I was becoming more skilled. I was becoming more confident. So whilst this time I wasn't investing in external assets, I was investing in myself and in other niches outside of dentistry, you

[31:59] listen to anyone, you listen to Alex or Mosy, you listen to Gary Vee, etc. They all say the same thing. Invest in yourself. And I think that's what they mean when they apply to dentistry. Whether it's postgraduate courses, the right equipment like photography, upskilling so you can do more procedures in a better way for your patients. These are all examples of investing in yourself because the truth is at that stage of my career, I really didn't earn enough money to be able to invest in other things. So I think the first five years should be all about what can I do to become the best dentist possible. Forget fast, just become good. I was

[32:29] always taught as a teenager that if you become good at something, the money will always follow. Just have your focus on becoming good at whatever it is you want to do. In the business world, there's this quote. I'm going to read it out for you. It is, "Show me your calendar and I'll show you how you earn your value." And if I was to apply this densry, I was at this um like a evening course. It was central London. And I was like, yeah, one year qualified. There was this uh gentleman who talks about mindset for associates and stuff. I think his name was Dr. Asiv Sed, but don't quote me on that. But really charismatic guy. And he

[33:00] says something so obvious, but so revelationary at the same time. Like this is something that we should all know. It's common sense, but no one actually thinks about it. Well, certainly I didn't, which is this. Your day list, i.e. the list of your patients that you get in the morning with, you know, everything that you're doing, your day list will instantly tell you your production. I know, isn't it just crazily obvious? But if you really extrapolate what that means is that your day list is a reflection of your earning power. [music] So essentially to really spell it out, which I probably needed back then, if you are full of exam and

[33:32] scale and polish and uh the odd singletoothoth composite here and there, there's a ceiling you will reach. You will reach a certain ceiling of income. Compare that to someone whose day list is sedation and implants, some oro cases, some major bonding cases, a rehab, a chrome denture with raising the vertical dimension. You get the point. Your day list is a representation of your earning power. So, how do we use this information? Well, it just links back to what I said a minute ago, which is invest in yourself. Do you have the right skills to be earning at the level

[34:03] that you want to? Because if you just do general bread and butter densory, you can still earn a decent income. But compared to someone who's regularly doing implants, which I don't by the way, ortho cases, even complex endo, there's going to be a difference in your income levels. So the first way to think about it is how do I become good at what I do? How can I upskill? And I think when you upskill, you actually bring more joy into dentistry. Densry is an art and a science and the whole art of doing endo, the art of doing a rehab. When you go beyond single tooth densory, things become a lot of fun. Now, there's

[34:35] nothing wrong with being a single tooth dentist, as long as that's what you want. But if you feel trapped and you feel like, I'm a single tooth dentist, but I really want to a quadrant dentist or to be able to do these procedures and you're fighting it and you feel that tension every day and you're putting it off or whatever, then that's no way to live your life. Okay? If you want to do single tooth densory and that brings you joy and fulfillment, then you are already winning, my friend. But if like me, you always had this itch like how do you raise the vertical dimension? How do you treat a wear case if you have that curiosity inside you? And that's what drove me towards learning occlusion and

[35:06] then being able to do bigger cases which was good news for my income but also good news for my patients. I was able to have a bigger impact in the lives of my patients and have more fun you know doing a injection molding like I'm doing a wear case tomorrow and I'm looking forward to it and it's been great to look at the photos the planning and exoad and yes being a little bit more comprehensive has it own issues and problems. We've talked about that in the other episodes. So going back to my journey when I was finishing up my second hostel position which was in Sheffield it was a um DCT2 in restorative densory I don't know now but back then it was a fantastic post. It

[35:37] introduced me to using a microscope uh retreatments under the scope rects under the scope um raising the vertical dimension doing complex dentures. It introduced me to that world. I really loved it but it also gave me a lot of clarity on my career because at that stage I wanted to be a restorative specialist. I wanted to be a consultant in restorative. That was like the sexiest thing going. But it helped me to see that I do not belong in a hospital. Years later when I read the book surrounded by idiots and I'm not saying that anyone in hospital is an idiot because you got to read the book to understand that actually I am the idiot. My personality is so red. So in that

[36:09] book he gives you a color. I am so red that I would struggle in a hospital environment. I think and I realized that true innovation happens in private practice. But here is the dilemma. I was a new grad just a few years out and yes I had more evidence of my photography. had a a better portfolio than most of the people at my cohort. So, um just a few years qualified, I had more photos, more experience, a better portfolio than anyone cuz I was just so driven in those first few years. But I didn't believe in myself. I knew that the fast pace of practice, 10-minute checkup, 15-inute

[36:40] checkups, that kind of setup was not for me. My mind just cannot work with that. It's probably why I ended up working in hospitals and working part-time in practice on Saturdays. But at that stage, I had major imposter syndrome. And so I was like who am I to apply to private practice? I don't think I'll find a private job. So at that time me and my wife did something really cool. Uh we decided to move to Singapore. Now in Singapore you just have private dentistry. So it was a great entry into private dentistry if you like and an opportunity to enjoy life. You know we look back at that time very fondly me and my wife you know. Oh yeah those 18 months we were in Singapore. We traveled

[37:11] around Asia. We went to Australia as well. It was great. And actually the income was decent. Like probably not as decent as UK but because the tax was way lower it was great. We ended up actually saving some money as well. And then 18 months later, because my wife got homesick, we came back to the UK and for the first time ever, we actually had some savings. We could start our new life in the UK. And so once again, why did we move back from Singapore? Wife got homesick, but years later, I realized that life is not about the destination. It's not even about the journey. It's about the people, right? We mentioned this in an episode with George Andre Cordoso who said this to

[37:41] me, and I just it always stuck with me. And I guess our people were all in London. My family, my wife's family. So actually I look at my situation now when I've got two boys aged six and two and we have family all around us and that I truly think is a beautiful thing. Whilst it was good to live as dinks in Singapore. So if you're wondering what dinks is is double income no kids. Okay. So I look at my dinks friends and I'm like a little bit envious sometimes. But uh in our season of life, you know, we are in a very special place. We got two young boys, young family with my parents and my wife's parents near us. Got my

[38:12] sister near me. I've got my brother-in-law near me. So it just puts everything into perspective. And I'm glad in the end that we did come back. So when I came back, I had an even better portfolio and now I had some experience of private densory. So I started to apply for private jobs. And guess what? I was offered private jobs. And so at one stage I did that thing that a lot of people do. I was working at three different private clinics at once. Uh life was very busy, very hectic, but great. I was learning so much. I was actually offered a job on Harley Street as an associate. And it was between that and choosing a practice

[38:42] in Windsor with someone called Dave Winkler. And when I asked someone about the these two uh principles, these two roles, someone very respectable in the industry said to me, if you want to learn, work with David. If you want to earn, work with the other guy. And so, you know what I did? I worked to learn. And so, uh, when you are young, I've been a big believer of work to learn, not to earn because learning is a way of investing in yourself and then you upskill and then you're able to produce more in the future. That's just the the mindset that I had. And so, I'm glad I did that. And so while I was commuting around all these clinics, one was 50 mi away, one was like 15 mi away, I was

[39:14] listening to audiobooks. And this is also when the Protrusive podcast was born because I got sick and tired of speaking to dentists on the phone asking me the same questions. Hey, how much money do you earn in Singapore? Do you need to do an exam? Do they speak English in Singapore? What's the lifestyle like in Singapore? All those questions. So the very first episode of Protrusive Podcast was to save me time so I can get back to my audio books and was expat dentist in Singapore. Shout out to Dr. Surrender Punion for being our guest on episode one. And so the rest is history, I guess. But anyway, those audio books, okay, so I was

[39:45] reading into my audio books and then uh I saw this Tony Robbins book. It's it was called Unshakable. I pressed download. Now I thought Unshakable was a book about mindset and how to make yourself resilient. I had no idea it was going to be a money book. And I'm so glad this wonderful accident happened because I listened to the entire book and it was all about index funds. It's all about being financially resilient. It's all about investing smartly and investing for the future. And so that's how I entered that rabbit hole of finances. So those of you who don't know what index funds are, it's like let's

[40:17] say the S&P 500, which is like the top 500 companies in the US. And imagine you put £1,000 in the S&P 500. And what happens to that £1,000 is that it gets spread out and invested into all those 500 top companies. And so that's a good thing because if you invest in just one company, like a long time ago, I put some money into Beyond Meat and I lost everything. Like Beyond Meat, I thought this is going to be the future. I put money in Beyond Meat and it went up by 50 60% in like a year, which is amazing. And now it's on like 98%. So I lost pretty much all my money on Beyond Meat.

[40:47] What makes index funds very attractive and a very smart investment is that even if one or two companies default of the S&P 500 the chances are the others are not and so the risk is lower than uh investing in just one company and so the rewards will not be as crazy high as you know you wouldn't get 67% increase in one year but you also wouldn't tank 98% as well in one year so index funds are seen as a very safe thing so if this is your introduction to index funds please do your research I invest in index funds through my ISA and my pension and so I guess if you're in the US it would be like a Roth IRA but I don't know much about that. Remember, this is not

[41:18] financial advice. Now, I'm not going to do a deep dive into unshakable. Essentially, just index funds, okay? Look into index funds, but um that sent me down a rabbit hole and I read so many books that year about personal finances. I really learned so much and I'm so glad that I accidentally found this because it's had a huge influence on my life. And so, if you're on my app, Protrusive Guidance, I've literally given you the top 10 books that have changed my life. Okay, I'm going to read them out, but I give like a little dentist version of what you can learn from that book in that article on protrusive guidance. So, yes, Rich Dad Poor Dad was another

[41:49] accident, I guess, when I was a student. Another one is The Simple Path to Wealth by JL Collins. Very calm and very boring book, but very effective. Again, it's about spending less than you earn, investing the difference, okay, in lowcost index funds. So, that's what that's about. Your money or your life. Really cool book. In fact, there's a chapter in that book which I just need to now go down this diversion, right? In this book, there's like hundreds of people in this sports hall or something and they're sat in rows. Now, these guys don't know this, but the organizers have arranged these people in rows based on

[42:19] their income. So, lowest earners at the back, highest earners at the front. And they give them a piece of paper and then everyone writes down their income, right? So, each row has a similar level of income. And then the row in front of them earns more. The row in front of that one earns more. So, that's like the general average. Now, on a piece of paper, they wrote down how much money they earn at the moment per year. And then they said, "Okay, now write how much money you think you need to be happy. How much money do you need that's a realistic amount that will just make you feel uh less stressed, less

[42:50] pressured, and happier?" And a really fascinating thing happened, right? Cuz the way they organized it is that each row was approximately 20% wealthier or or 20% higher earnner than the previous row. And so the very back row wrote an answer that was approximately 20% higher. So let's say you're earning 100,000 bananas. Uh then you write, "Oh, you know what? If I was earning 120,000 bananas, I'd be happier." So they write 120,000 bananas. In the next row, well, the average income was already 120,000 bananas. Then they wrote down, "Oh, I'd

[43:20] be happy if 148,000 bananas." Do you see what I mean? And they saw this phenomenon on every single row. And so it was funny because each row was writing the income of the next row, thinking, "Ah, I'll be happy when I get there." But no one was actually happy. Everyone wanted more income. and everyone's baseline happiness was not affected. No matter if you're in the top row or the back row, your general happiness wasn't that different. And that was very fascinating from that book. And essentially that book's really cool because it talks about investing aggressively. So that for example, when

[43:52] you get to your 50s and 60s, you can practice dentistry because you want to, not because you have to. And it's all about investing aggressively when you're young. Uh similar book set for life by Scott Trench. Again, all these books, all the lessons for dentists are all in this article on protrusive guidance you can access for free. Uh the other one was quit like a millionaire. Uh oh, one of my favorite I will teach you to be rich. And the the last part of this podcast, I'll just talk a little bit about that basically. So a great book, really good mindset book. Uh the millionaire next door essentially saying that most millionaires don't look rich. They drive modest cars, live below their

[44:24] means, and value independence over appearances. Then an unshakable obviously cuz that's the one that got me into it. Buy Back Your Time by Dan Martell was classic. I think practice owners would really like that one. And the five types of wealth by Sahil Bloom because financial wealth is only one pillar. The other types of wealth are time, social, physical, and mental wealth. And so I really like that about that book. So those are just 10 books right there. So I hope I've inspired you to just learn more. I think everyone should go down that rabbit hole. So I'm just going to wrap up by telling you about your rich life. So this is from

[44:54] that uh book by Ramit Safi. I will teach you to be rich. And he says that everyone can be rich. Everyone can live their rich life. You just need to define what that looks like. So the exercise you do is you write on a piece of paper is that if you were rich, what would life look like? Like actually realistically, you know, what time would you wake up? What would you have for breakfast? What would your day look like? What kind of holidays would you go on? Uh what kind of car would you drive? All these kind of things, right? So you write down everything that would be in your rich life. And the beauty is that everyone's rich life looks a little bit

[45:25] different. So for me, I don't value cars that much. Okay? If you give me a Ferrari, Lamborghini, it doesn't mean anything to me. For me, living my rich life means that I can afford to go to the most expensive gym in my area. And I do. And so to really just summarize his point, it's the philosophy of the book is to spend lavishly on the things that you love and that bring you joy and to save mercilessly on things that don't bring you joy. So me personally, I like to spend on holidays with my family. I don't like to spend on cars at the moment. I like to spend money on like

[45:55] supplements and health and wellness and longevity. I don't like to spend money on junk food. I have zero interest in fancy watches, Rolexes, but I will spend lavishly on my Samsung Galaxy smartwatch because having those sleep metrics and the workout data is what is part of my rich life. So remember guys, all of us can live our rich life. It just depends on defining what is your rich life. Saving mercilessly on things that don't bring you joy and spend kind of guilt-free on the things that you truly value and bring you joy. Oh, another one, by the way, I spend lavishly on coffee, but specifically on their very

[46:26] specific coffee called Exhale. There supposed to be super healthy coffee. So, I have a monthly subscription with that cuz that's part of my rich life. Whereas, when it comes to clothing and stuff, my wife will vouch for this. I'm just not into clothing brands. I'm very simple guy. So, everyone's rich life looks different. So, three action steps, guys. What does your rich life look like? The other two actions is what is your current savings rate? I want you to do analysis and think about your savings rate. And number three, based on this solo episode, firstly, hit subscribe, hit like, tell me how you found this episode. If you're on Protrusive Guidance, I love you even more. Thanks for being part of it. Again, tell me how

[46:58] was this solo episode? Haven't done one in a while. And so, what do you need to educate yourself on? That's the final thing. What do you need to educate yourself on? Remember, none of this was financial advice. It was just how I see my personal finances and career security. And essentially, what I want to do is get into my 50s and work because I want to and not because I need to. And so like I said, the way I do that at the moment is I save aggressively as possible. I try to live below my means. I save in ISA, which is stocks and shares and index funds and also via my pension. And to get clarity on all these things, you need to do your

[47:29] own research and read those books. You need to go down those rabbit holes. So there we have it, guys. Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end. Thanks for being part of Protrusive Guidance and this theme in general. Hope it's given you some ideas and I look forward to revisiting this theme again next year. Otherwise, I catch you same time, same place next week. Bye for now. [music]

[48:01] >> [music]
