# Relapse, Retention and Compliance - Orthodontics Medico-Legal Perspectives - GF023
videoId: xkxX7Ww-QFY
url: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xkxX7Ww-QFY
duration: 28:38
publishedDate: 2025-04-17
publishedTimeText: 1 year ago

[0:00] Rotations in general are a tricky movement. I was always taught to treat rotations early and they are one of the highest to relapse along with like diastas and stuff as well. So just give us a clinical perspective Shimani on what are the different high risk movements that are at risk of relapse. But another thing that we do at our practice is when we have complaint cases, we always have two clinicians in the room. And I think that sometimes dampens that defensive, especially for the clinician that is at question. And then you do have another clinician with

[0:31] another set of eyes is looking at the scenario completely unbiased and patients value that. We've got three real world orthodontic scenarios that have the theme of communication and medical legal considerations. For example, that patient that complains that their lateral incizer has rotated and they're upset and you need to figure out is it cuz they haven't worn their retainer or the retention has let you down. And what kind of soft skills do you need to have to pacify this scenario? The second scenario is one that we've all faced. That patient that

[1:02] just has terrible compliance with their aligners and they need a whole set of 14 for example again and they're upset because this was only supposed to take a year and now we're on year three. Why? bill because of the patient's crappy compliance. But how do you handle this scenario when the patient is upset both clinically and the medical legal perspectives? And finally, the very saucy and difficult scenario three of an associate leaving a practice and leaving behind some patients who need their orthorontic cases finishing off. This is a really stressful scenario when you

[1:33] have to take over someone else's orthorontic cases and the medical legal challenges that this brings. So, I'm pleased to be joined today by Dr. Shivani Patel and Dr. Neil Jaswell. Shibbani is a specialist orthorontist. She's a consultant in private practice. And Neil Jaswell is our resident medical legal guy. He's a dentist as well. And it's just great to have his medical legal perspectives as a representative of professional dental indemnity. Hello Patricati. I'm Jez Galanti and welcome back to your favorite dental podcast. This is the group function series where we come together to tackle realworld

[2:04] scenarios. Whilst this episode has got clinical gems, we also cover so much about communication and the medical legal perspective. So it really is a triple threat of an episode which is eligible for CPD and of course we are a PACE approved provider. So whether you want CPD or CE, we've got you covered. Let's now join the main interview and I'll catch you in the outro. Doctors Shivani Patel and Dr. Neil Jesswell, thank you so much for joining us. Neil, a veteran. You are like the the medical legal like my my you know like angel and a devil on each shoulder. You're like my angel. This always give me good advice.

[2:35] Shivani, I hoping you're not you're not you're not not gonna definitely not fulfill the role of devil today because you are another angel, our orthodontic angel, and basically your job today is to discuss some really tough topics that are hard-hitting, but they're very realworld issues. We've got some really great scenarios and your specialist opinion and input is going to be so valuable. There's going to be clinical gems in here in terms of learning about relapse and success rates, but also how to manage those tough scenarios from a communication and management perspective. Now for those who uh

[3:06] haven't come across you before Shiovani tell us about yourself as a specialist orthorontist and all the various hats that you wear. Thank you Jazz for this invitation and nice to see you Neil. I'm Shivani Patel. I am a specialist orthodontist born and brought up in Kenya. So I have a East African background and I came here as an international student. So I did all my training at Guys Hospital which was at that time known as UMDS. So that was a long time ago and then worked through the ropes of VT Maxfax community did my

[3:37] orthorontic training at the Royal London hospital and then went on to do my consultant training at the Queen Victoria Hospital and my KEF training at Guys. So that's my background. So been in hospital for quite a long time. continued working in hospital the John Radcliffe and then ventured off to do private orthodontics when orthodontics was quite threatened in the in the hospital setting when you know the government was thinking that orthodontics even though it's Maxf fact is is considered cosmetic since then haven't looked back so left the hospital

[4:07] setting about 16 years ago and been purely private I've only worked for myself so I think I'm unemployable now and always worked in partnership in in my practices so based in London and Wimple Street. So that's 11. We were also in Henley and now very newly based at Parklane Orthodontics in in Reading, literally down the road from from me where I work as an associate. So we must catch up in person as well. Neil, thanks so much for for joining us again. For those who haven't listened yet to a really popular episode we did, indemnity

[4:39] versus insurance, what's the difference? You know, you covered that really well. You gave us a great analogies to actually understand that very confusing topic. just remind those who haven't any had any interaction with you yet and to listen back to the episodes. We covered other scenarios like you know pain after a crown fit a patient that doesn't like their veneers implants that don't quite go to plan. So these medical legal episodes have been really quite popular but Neil remind us about you and your journey and and your passions. Uh yeah thank you Jess for having me as always. I'm a private practitioner. I've got my

[5:11] own practice Neil Dentistry about 12 13 years now. Before that I was an NHS practitioner, worked in Australia, I did house jobs, MaxFax, everything. So I think I had a good broad spectrum of background. But what really sort of kicked me up a notch was uh going to Frank Spear in Arizona and doing quite a lot of those courses. And that really elevated me. And since then, we've always had an orthodontist in the practice because you were saying, you know, Shivani, it's it's cosmetic. It's definitely not cosmetic. You know, we know that. So any treatment we do has to

[5:41] be functional long-lasting and ortho is such a huge cornerstone for that. So we've always had either an orthodontist or associates doing ortho. So really crucial and then probably about six seven years ago now I sort of fell into helping some insurers with their product and we formed professional dental indemnity nearly 500 clients now. So, that's quite good considering uh you know, it's just me and Gary really, but with support from people like Jazz and friends and family and peers and Facebook, we've just grown by word of

[6:12] mouth really. And as Jazz was alluding to, the podcasts that we've done with Jazz to be honest, it's not really me. It's the other guests are so, you know, entertaining and informative and educated. So, anyone, I would really suggest you go back and look at those videos of Jazz intimated. your angelic voice and uh experience of dealing with so many clients who they come to you looking for advice and these scenarios we've seen before is very valuable including today. So let's go ahead and hit that first scenario. We've got three scenarios if time permits we we shall

[6:42] cover. The third one being the most challenging. The first one's quite more clinical. Second one's more about complaint handling and third one's like okay you know an orthorontist is gone and another one comes in and that kind of dilemma that that creates right so giving you a flavor so you guys stick around but the first one is I'll read out the scenario but then actually we'll just get into like you know the TLDDR version which is Mrs. Jones has had successful orthontics done in your practice two years ago. So, it's been two years. She's probably been discharged and being looked after by GDP or if you are the GDP, you know, you're seeing this patient for checkups, right?

[7:13] And then when she attends her routine exam and hygiene, she complains that her upper right lateral incizer is now rotated, okay? She claims that she's wearing the retainers every night, okay, but is unhappy with this relapse, which is understandable, right? You know, we we pay for orthodontics, we want a smile, and we want to maintain that smile, okay? And then she is suggesting legal ramifications and she wants to know what the costs involved are and she just wants to get this fixed. Okay. So the the TLDDR is there's relapse, there's rotation and the the first thing

[7:45] to point out I guess clinically, you know, I'm doing this Shivani knows this already but for for the benefit of everyone rotations in general are a tricky movement. I was always taught to treat rotations early and they are one of the highest to relapse along with like diastmas and stuff as well. So just give us a clinical perspective Shimani on what are the different highrisk movements that are at risk of relapse. So you're absolutely right Jazz. Rotated teeth are one of the high-risisk movements. Uh space dentist very very high risk movements. They almost need

[8:16] bonded retainers and sometimes double bonded retainers. Diastmas uh fall into that category as well. Extraction cases, children and adults will relapse very often or spaces sli small slivers of spaces will open up. Parodontal cases because they don't have much alvola bone and and gum supporting those teeth. So they do need belt and braces when it comes to retention. And then of course complicated cases such as orthogonathic surgery have to be retained fulltime very very well long term. You mentioned

[8:46] double retention. Just what do you mean by double retention? So this is what I learned over the few years when I mean double wires especially when it's medium dastimas we'll always run a bonded retainer three to three but we'll also run an additional wire one to one and it's it's all bonded together and that for me has worked because retention is an absolute and I think that's what you have to educate your patients through continuous communication you're seeing your patients long enough for you to be constantly consenting and communicating

[9:18] with them through the whole process whether it's for retainers or anything active is telling them that for for us I mean bonded retainers and uh removable retainers go as a pair when I've tried to do one and not the other in my hands I've always had some sort of movement no matter how mild or severe the case has been so well in this case then in this case I think Neil when you wrote the scenario I think I'll be assuming that this patient only has removable retainers based on what I'm when I'm reading the scenario Again, would you

[9:48] agree with that, Neil? Is that the kind of scenario we're going for? I think having, you know, seen a lot of these cases come through, it's either removal retainers only and there is a bit of, you know, gib in the retainers, but also they've had a fixed wire as well. So, there may have been, but the wires snapped and they don't realize. So, it can be both. Would you agree Shivani? Agree. It can be could be anything. I think the important thing I think with any complaint first to start off with rather than diving into the clinical is to show that overall empathy. Perhaps they've already mentioned this at

[10:19] reception and that's where the empathy starts to prevent this from escalating is I'm so sorry to hear that Mrs. Jones. Let me see when I can fit you in Dr. Patel's diary. So that empathy that whole you're building that experience before it escalates to anything legal and training your staff that when there is a complaint booking in the right amount of time. This is not something that can be rushed. Once they're in your chair, I think listening to what it is, inspecting if there is a bonded retainer, is the integrity there? If

[10:50] they have an SX retainer, that's where the education comes with reception. Please bring your retainers with you so we can have a look. Inspecting the fit, looking at the wear and tear, asking them how often they wear it because patients forget, you know, every night sometimes means once a night or less than four nights. And that's where we start seeing the movement. Is there any way is there any quick way Shivani before we continue that you know when someone says they've been wearing their retainer every night let's say it's a removal retainer is there any clinically

[11:22] accepted way to validate that how comfortable they are with taking it in and out the wear and tear on those retainers they will be worn especially adults you'll start to see cracks or even because generally majority of them are grinders you'll start to see cracks at just of the sevens sometimes the canines have little pin pinpoint holes on them. So, those are telltale signs that they are actually wearing them. And of course, the way they fit, they fit very flush. They're not looking brand new as if they've just come from the lab

[11:54] and nobody's actually put them in the mouth. So, there are a few telltale signs. Also, you can gauge compliance because remember, you've seen these patients over months. So, you know your compliant patients. You know, the ones that wore the elastics, the when they turned up on their appointments, they wore their aligners. So you you can gauge that as well. The thing with laterals moving is, as we said, it could be that the bonded retainer has lost its integrity and the patient doesn't know. It could be that you've just finished the bonded retainer at that lateral point. And this is where we've been

[12:26] learning our lessons having been in the same practice for 15 years as you see your cases come back. It's too short. it does need to be extended to the canines because as soon as you put short retainers and they stop wearing the SX those laterals will flare out guaranteed at some point. So it could be that or it could be that there is absolutely nothing wrong. The patient just thinks that tooth has rotated and that's where photographs come into handy. Of course at Debond it's assumed that those you're taking those records but at our practice

[12:57] which is good clinical practice for a whole year we see our patients in retainers because you're enforcing you got to wear these retainers every night you got to wear these retainers every night so it's at 3 months 6 months 9 months and we take photographs then as well so you have a comparison and a baseline and it could be there's nothing wrong you're like look it all looks great nothing to worry about or it can be yes I can see this tooth has moved the bonded retainer has come away. We have some options here. So now this is where your goodwill starts to kick in.

[13:27] If they've had a liners, then they may be in their warranty because it's only been a year or two years. Fabulous. We're in our warranty period. How about we tidy this up, put on our bonded retainers again, and get you back to where you were. If they've had fixed braces, I'm not shy of saying, "Let's put on sectional. Let's let's put it on. Couple of visits, we'll drotate this. it'll be absolutely back to where it was and we put our wires back on again. And that's where you're this is the whole experience and that's what counts

[13:57] because this patient may have brought three children. She may have already sent her husband or she's going to do all of that and talk about you and and that's what it counts the whole package from where the reception has booked in the way you've dealt with it and it's it's it's not a big deal in the grand scheme of things where teeth I think dentists sometimes make this a big deal. They feel like they've failed massively. they take it personally and I think retention is one of those things where and relapse is one of those things that is kind of inevitable to you when you treat enough patients there'll be a small percentage from either compliance

[14:28] reasons or biomechanical reasons and certain movements that this will happen so if you don't mind sharing this you know how many patients that per year I mean hoping not very much but you know this this happens in all specialist practice especially GDPs I'd say you know we have the odd one where we need to help out and I think what I've learned in the past as well is you know when this happens you can really show your your color and your patient dedication to to a patient and really look after him and what they will do for word of mouth hopefully afterwards will more than make up for the the extra time and expenses incurred by you as a

[14:59] clinician as in how many patients this year have I retreated yeah I mean as as a percentage maybe you know I I really what I really want to hear is that even specialists will be this happened to you know is this this happens to everyone we're trying to just get out to to the GDPs absolutely because remember retention is an absolute you you can't control the patients when they're at home and when you've discharged them. I I would say at the moment I have two cases going on but those patients that was the time when I was finishing the retainers 2 to2 and they stopped wearing

[15:31] their Sexes. So those teeth have flared out. No issues putting on fixed four to four. We're aligning. We're actually debonding today. That's good because you have they've come back and as an orthodontist that they're now using other specialties. They come for checkups. They come for hygiene. They use your parodontist. So I'm building goodwill across the board for my whole team. If I was to charge them and say, "No, this is this is it's going to be a fee. We're going to charge you for an upper arch." And that's going to be very defensive on my part. Mhm. And Neil,

[16:02] what do you think as a medical legal perspective? Right. If we are convinced that this patient is just, you know, last two years is in this specific scenario was two years. And what I encourage is when whether it's my clues or appliances or retainers, I say every checkup, please bring it in. I love to inspect them. I love to see how they're fitting. I love to see how they're doing. So I I've noticed that, oh, maybe Mrs. Jones is not bringing them in to every check. I haven't actually seen these in a while, and now she's complaining of this rotation. I am convinced because there's not enough wear on them. They don't look rotty enough. She's salivating a lot. She's struggling to remove them because obviously it's a sign that she's not

[16:33] wearing them. And I'm convinced that this is on the patient's part. Even though at the beginning she's watched my Loom video explaining how important retention is. She signed my consent form saying how important retention is. This one's generally on the patient. Okay. And I'm upset as a practitioner to deliver good customer service because I feel like I've been cheated here. What do you think as a medical legal perspective? Is this something that we should perhaps say stand our ground and then and therefore nothing we are invincible because we are in the the moral high ground here. What do you think? It's a good question because you

[17:03] can think well I've done nothing wrong here and you know the patient has gone remiss. You know we've given them every warning. It's a tricky one because I think you are probably right. You know if the patient holds a hand if the patient is saying to you I've warned them etc. Then really it's a frank conversation and just say look you know I'm here to help you. I want to meet you halfway with this. It really they really don't look like you've worn them to be honest with you. You know, you're struggling to put them in and out and can I just really ask, you know, because look, we've got to help each other out here. Is have you been wearing them? And

[17:35] I would, if you've got that kind of relationship with someone that and you're a good communicator, I would just say, look, let's be honest with each other and then at least we can help each other. But if if we're not on the same page straight away, it's going to be more difficult for us to help you. So, I would really push for the honesty. And I think most patients will say, "Yeah, oh, yeah, my dog ate them." Or, you know, I went on holiday for a few weeks. I said, "Well, okay, look, you know, it's human nature. I wouldn't be angry at any patient. You know, I don't wear my retainers. Sorry, Shiovani." So, don't be angry with me. Life got in the way.

[18:05] So, I think we always have to be human. And in that case, it may be a scenario is look, you know, I won't charge you for the orthodontics, but the fixed retainer, you know, is broken and there's a normal fee for that. Your retainers, we expect them to last three years. you'll need new ones because the teeth will, you know, so we may be other ways that we can kind of not get our money back, but so to speak, we can kind of try and break even on other little bits and meet them halfway. But I think if it was like Shiovani's patient where they're a really good attender, they've attended the practice, you've got a really good history with them, I think

[18:36] goodwill is is better, but I can understand where you may haven't got such a good relationship with the patient. It's a tricky one because that's the kind of patient that's going to turn on you as well. It all boils down to communication just like you said and also having that empathetic approach in the beginning and said actually they generally want this clinician actually generally wants to help me and you know instead of having to charge the patient again where they they're getting a good deal here in terms of getting their teeth straightened again and yes there's the maintenance part they may need to pay basically so discussion to have is that a point you think Neil if you're unsure to because this was a hot topic

[19:07] on the on the protrusive guidance community recently right should you call your indemnity stroke insurance right because there's a huge debate on social media at the moment and Shivani I don't know if you've seen where clinicians are are calling you know every six months they might call their indemnity and they say hey um I had this issue can I just talk through this patient with you right get some advice and stuff and maybe they they don't even need to nothing ever comes of it and then 5 years later you request your letter of good standing and you see like a log of every single time you call your indemnity right and then suddenly the demity goes hey actually

[19:37] we've realized you've been calling us a lot here and therefore we've now doubled your indemnity fee right and so people are now thinking hmm Should I not be calling my indemnity? So, there's a little debate that's been happening behind the scenes. Neil, what do you think? As someone who represents professional dent indemnity, do you think that these phone calls of advice should be acting against our clinicians? Well, absolutely not. You know, that's what we pay for. We pay for advice. And I'm going to be really honest with you. I have seen it where I've seen someone's logs and they've recorded everything and

[20:08] certain indemnifiers have asked the client to leave or a new insurer won't take them on. And I can argue the fact, look, there's been no claims, no payouts, nothing. They've just had advice. They thought they were supposed to report every little thing, you know, denture loose, whatever. They've got 10, 15 things on there. And the insurers go, "We think one of these is going to hit. They're calling too much." And I've seen that. And I've seen that with other indemnifiers. For us, we're part of the uh project sphere thing that we started. You know, we were very much at the beginning of that which is an initiative by department health where you can call

[20:40] and it's not held against you because we think that's safer working practice. So for us, if there's no letter of complaint, if it's something like this where a normal thing patients come in, you definitely should call us. You can talk to me if you want it off the record. You I'm happy to talk as a a peer or a friend or or you can talk to our brilliant legal team or you know dental legal adviserss and they would be happy to speak to you because one you look like a safe practitioner because this doesn't happen to you very often. So what shall I do in this case? They'd probably say yeah that's great. Thanks for letting us know. And if anything does come of it, they will indemnify you

[21:12] because you haven't tried to manage it or it up yourself too far down the line without getting some advice because you can hinder us a lot by starting to do letters or you know refunds and all that kind of stuff. So I think it's for with PDR you should definitely call us and you might get some good advice. At what point do you charge them and how much do you charge them? Especially when the patient puts their hand up and say, you know, I haven't been so good at wearing my nighttime retainers. I have been a little lax. I think you also have to put value on retreatment again. And

[21:45] that value could be that's why I'm not going to charge you for my time, but I'm just going to charge you for the Invisalign lab fee, you know. And I think that way it's a win-win for everybody. You you met them halfway. you're going to achieve what they want and they're expecting you to get them back to where they were, but you're putting value in as in don't do that next time because there is going to be a cost element in that. The other thing about calling the indeinency team exactly that's what you're paying them for for their advice. But another thing

[22:16] that we do at our practice is when we have complaint cases, we always have two clinicians in the room. And I think that sometimes dampens that defensive especially for the clinician that is at question and then you do have another clinician with another set of eyes is looking at the scenario completely unbiased and patients value that and you know when they have whether it's a partner a senior clinician a clinician from another specialty or a clinician from the same specialty sometimes auntie and I will see patients together if he has he's got some tricky conversations

[22:47] or some will pop into mine and I think patients value that as well to say leave it with us, you know, and and they feel that they're heard. If two people are listening, they're like, "Okay, this is a big thing, you know, they value what I have to say and what I have to complain about." And and that works very often for us. And it could I add something just suggest something? Maybe I've had it the other way where the wife has brought the husband along. It wasn't my case, but as a principal, I was dealing with it. And the husband's, you know, big burly, you know, obtuse chap. and I

[23:20] felt very intimidated. You know, I was upset about the conversation. So, if you have two clinicians and the patient walks in, some patients may feel a little bit ganged up on. So, the way I would do it, and Shivani, obviously, it's different in your practice. You know, you're really nice people, is I would get the patient in and say, you know, thanks for bringing to our attention. We want all our patients to be happy. You know, I say, I live in the village. It's really important to me that we look after you. Do you mind if I bring one of my colleagues in as well? Because sometimes two eyes are better than one. I'll just see if he's free.

[23:50] He's going to be free because we've preempted it. But they are not like, "Oh, these two are trying to get out of something by ganging up on me. We're trying to get, you know, another opinion because I really care about getting me fixed." Yeah. You know, sorry. Perhaps I I was like, "Oh, we'll be waiting for them as they come up the stairs." I meant that you know there would be an invitation to say is it okay if if you know two of us see you and see you know it's always nice to have more opinions and more options on how we can solve this for you. This reminds me of another initiative that some practices have

[24:21] where they do a second opinion clinic where if you've seen a dentist and you think you know what I've never been diagnosed with decay. It's quite common when the first time a young patient in their 20s gets diagnosed with decay. That's the time I've seen before like wait hang on a minute I've never had needed a restoration before you know an easy it's quite clear on the radio they need a restoration but you know the patient themselves like I've never had a restoration before I've never had a crown before whatever and then to have a second opinion system in the clinic whereby you can see another condition don't pay again but just get some reassurance and get a fresh pair of eyes is is a nice thing I'm just going to

[24:52] wrap this scenario up before going to the next one just by asking one more clinical question Shiobani which is efficacy in terms of evidence base right there is lots of evidence where I've seen that saying that you know the fixed retainer versus removal retainer are equally as effective. Right. But we have clinician experience from yourself and and many other orthorontists I speak to whereby they swear that a specific brand of fixed retainer is not as effective as another or they find that when they don't do the dual approach, they are still seeing relapse and they feel uneasy about that. How effective is a common scenario which is just giving the

[25:24] patients va retainers or just removables retainers only. Okay. as a default thing that you do basically because a lot of practice the way they work is okay that's included if you want fixed retainers that's extra and so patient says okay I'll get my retainers that's doing the job how effective is that overall okay guys thank you for making it to scenario number three but you know what sometimes we discuss themes on this podcast that are not really designed for the public eye it can't actually be shared to Spotify and Apple on YouTube cuz this is dentist talk it's only for

[25:54] dentists to truly understand the gravitas of these themes that we discovered that are not in the best interest of the public eye or the public ears. Which is why this scenario is freely discussed. You don't have to pay for it. It's freely discussed on Protrusive Guidance. Just head over to protrusive.app. And if you love Protrusive, you can get our entire library of episodes including the hidden secret episodes which aren't suitable for the general public. Make a free account if you want. And if you want to make a paid account and get CPD certificates and access all our dental master classes, then you can do that as

[26:24] well. Once you've made an account, you can download Protrusive Guidance on Android or Apple and join the nicest and geekiest community of dentists in the world. So, hope you understand why on YouTube or Spotify Apple. I'm going to jump straight to the outro, but if you're watching this on the app, then you're in the best place already. Well, there we have it, guys. Thank you so much for listening all the way to the end. I managed to squeeze in there, am I naughty if I'm always happy to put my neck on the line for you guys? I want to thank our guests, Dr. Shmani Patel and Dr. Neil Juel. I'll put the links below for the British Orthodontic Conference and the Dental and Tubers Congress where

[26:54] Shivani is doing a workshop. And if you're on Protrusive Guidance, I'll also put Shiobani's email so you can reach out. You know, I think she's a great role model. And if you're ever able to shadow clinicians like Shiobani, I think you should totally take such an opportunity. If you want CPD or C credits for this episode and you're already on the app, scroll down below on the premium version and answer the questions and you get 80% you get a certificate emailed to you by our CPD queen, Marie. If you always listen to the episodes and you're never claiming CPD, think of how many hours you could have clocked up. Go on, what are you waiting for? Download Protrusive Guidance, make an account, and start

[27:25] collecting your CE. If you're curious whether insurance for professional dental indemnity could save you money on your medical legal cover, head to protrusive.co.uk/ insurance, that is an affiliate link. So, Protrusive does get rewarded financially. But if you prefer not to get the 100 discount and pay full price, you can totally do that as well. I hope you enjoyed the clinical and medical legal perspectives we discussed. I'll catch you same time, same place next week. Bye for now. [Music]
