Selection Criteria





for Dental Radiography





updated 2018



Selection Criteria



for Dental Radiography



3RD EDition (UPDAtED 2018)

EDitoRS: K Horner, K A eAton



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) i

Published by

Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

London

Email: fgdp@fgdp.org.uk

Website: www.fgdp.org.uk



Selection Criteria



for Dental Radiography



tHiRD EDition (UPDAtED 2018)

EDitoRS: K Horner, K A eAton



iSBn: 978-1-9999761-0-1

First edition published 1998

Second edition published 2004

third edition published 2013 (reprinted 2015 and 2018)



© Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 2018

All rights reserved. no part of this publication may be reproduced,

stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by

any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopied, recorded or

otherwise, without the prior written permission of the Faculty

of General Dental Practice (UK).

While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the

information contained in this publication, no guarantee can be

given that all errors and omissions have been excluded. the Faculty

of General Dental Practice (UK) can accept no responsibility for

loss occasioned to any person acting or refraining from action as

a result of material in this publication.

All commerical product names carry the trademark of their

manufacturer.

Production editors: Dave o’Malley, Justine Wallis, Amy Brewerton

Artwork/graphic design: Paul Woodcock, Herita MacDonald, Julie

Brown, Mica Connelly & Darren Westlake at Smart Monkey Design Print management: Hobbs



ii Selection Criteria for Dental radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

C o n t E n t S





FoREWoRD ix

ACKnoWLEDGEMEntS xi

PREFACE to tHE tHiRD EDition xv



1 introduction 1

1.1 REMit 1

1.2 JUStiFiCAtion in RADioLoGy 1

1.3 WHy ARE GUiDELinES nEEDED? 2

1.4 WHAt ARE GUiDELinES? 3

1.5 WHy EviDEnCE-BASED GUiDELinES? 4

1.6 iMPLEMEntAtion AnD AUDit 5

1.7 REviEW oF GUiDELinES 5

1.8 UnDERStAnDinG tHE GUiDELinES 6

1.9 GUiDELinE MEtHoDoLoGy 6

1.10 GAPS in tHE EviDEnCE 8

1.11 ovERviEW oF RECoMMEnDAtionS 8

1.12 REFEREnCES 9



2 use of ionising radiation 11

2.1 RADiAtion DoSES AnD RiSKS in DEntAL PRACtiCE 11

2.1.1 Introduction 11

2.1.2 Radiation damage 11

2.1.3 Radiation dose 13

2.1.4 Factors influencing effective dose 14

2.1.5 The risks 17



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) iii C o n t E n t S



2.1.6 Diagnostic reference levels 19

2.1.7 Doses and risks in context 20

2.2 tHE USE oF PAnoRAMiC RADioGRAPHy 21

2.2.1 The new patient to the practice 22

2.2.2 The endentulous patient 23

2.2.3 The orthodontic patient 23

2.2.4 Prior to oral surgery 24

2.2.5 Trauma 24

2.2.6 Temporomandibular joint problems 25

2.2.7 Conclusions 25

2.3 REFEREnCES 27



3 radiographs in the management of the developing dentition 33

3.1 intRoDUCtion 33

3.2 EARLy MixED DEntition 34

3.2.1 Upper labial segment 34

3.2.2 Lower labial segment 36

3.2.3 Posterior segments 37

3.3 LAtE MixED DEntition 38

3.3.1 Labial segments 38

3.3.2 Canines 38

3.3.3 Deciduous molars 39

3.3.4 Permanent molars 40

3.4 oRtHoDontiC tREAtMEnt 41

3.5 REFEREnCES 41



4 radiographs in dental caries diagnosis 43

4.1 intRoDUCtion 43

4.2 CHiLDREn 44

4.2.1 Caries risk assessment 45



iv Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) C o n t E n t S



4.2.2 High caries risk 46

4.2.3 Moderate caries risk 47

4.2.4 Low caries risk 48

4.3 ADULtS 49

4.3.1 High caries risk 51

4.3.2 Moderate caries risk 51

4.3.3 Low caries risk 51

4.4 DiGitAL DEntAL RADioGRAPHy 52

4.5 nEWER RADioGRAPHiC MEtHoDS AnD ALtERnAtivES

to RADioGRAPHS FoR CARiES DiAGnoSiS 52

4.5.1 Cone beam computed tomography 52

4.5.2 Elective temporary tooth separation 53

4.5.3 Fibreoptic transillumination 54

4.5.4 Electrical methods of caries diagnosis 55

4.5.5 Laser fluorescence methods 56

4.5.6 Quantitative laser fluorescence 56

4.6 REFEREnCES 57



4A. ALtERnAtivE APPRoACH to RADioGRAPHy FoR CARiES DiAGnoSiS in CHiLDREn 61

4A.1 tHE EAPD APPRoACH 61

4A.2 REFEREnCES 63



5 radiographs in periodontal assessment 65

5.1 intRoDUCtion 65

5.2 RECoMMEnDAtionS 66

5.3 REFEREnCES 69



6 radiographs in endodontics 71

6.1 intRoDUCtion 71

6.2 EnDoDontiC DiAGnoSiS 71



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) v C o n t E n t S



6.3 Root CAnAL tREAtMEnt PLAnninG 72

6.3.1 Non-surgical root canal treatment 73

6.3.2 Surgical root canal treatment 74

6.4 Root CAnAL tREAtMEnt 74

6.4.1 Electronic apex locators 75

6.5 EnDoDontiC FoLLoW-UP 77

6.6 otHER EnDoDontiC tREAtMEntS 79

6.6.1 Vital pulp procedures 79

6.6.2 Dental trauma 79

6.7 ConE BEAM CoMPUtED toMoGRAPHy 80

6.8 REFEREnCES 83



7 radiographs in implant dentistry 85

7.1 intRoDUCtion 85

7.2 REviEW oF RADioLoGiCAL tECHniqUES 87

7.2.1 Periapical radiography 88

7.2.2 Occlusal radiography 89

7.2.3 Panoramic radiography 89

7.2.4 Lateral cephalometric radiography 90

7.2.5 Conventional cross–sectional tomography 90

7.2.6 X-ray computed tomography 91

7.2.7 Cone beam computed tomography 91

7.2.8 Magnetic resonance imaging 94

7.3 CHoiCE oF tECHniqUES 95

7.4 REFEREnCES 96



8 imaging strategy for the adult patient 99

8.1 intRoDUCtion 99

8.2 tHE nEW ADULt PAtiEnt 100



vi Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) C o n t E n t S



8.2.1 Panoramic radiography 100

8.2.2 Cone beam computed tomography 100

8.3 SPECiFiC CLiniCAL SitUAtionS 102

8.3.1 Extraction of teeth 102

8.3.2 Heavily restored teeth 103

8.3.3 Toothwear 104

8.3.4 Radiographs for the estimation of endodontic working length 104

8.4 LonG-tERM REviEW AnD MAintEnAnCE 105

8.4.1 Periodontal 105

8.4.2 Caries 105

8.4.3 Endodontic follow-up radiographs 106

8.4.4 Dental implants 106

8.5 REFEREnCES 106



9 good practice 109

9.1 Do’S AnD Don’tS 109

9.1.1 Do 109

9.1.2 Don’t 110

9.2 iDEAS FoR AUDit: DEvELoPinG LoCAL GUiDELinES 111

9.2.1 An audit to measure the quality of radiographs

compared with NRPB guidelines 111

9.2.2 Setting a standard 112

9.2.3 Involving all team members 113

9.2.4 Gathering data 113

9.2.5 Comparing standards 115

9.2.6 Formulating an action plan 116

9.2.7 Audits involving teamwork in dental radiography 116

9.3 MoRE AUDit iDEAS 119

9.4 REFEREnCES 120



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) vii

viii Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



D E A n ’ S F o R E W o R D





Since our foundation in 1992, the Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) has

endeavoured to improve standards in primary dental care. our standards and

evidence-based guidelines (such as this current edition of Selection Criteria for Dental

Radiography) are a core element of our work in this respect. this document, and our

other standards publications, have become recognised within the profession as

authoritative statements of good practice.



technological advances in dental radiography since the 2004 edition mean that

the third edition represents a re-write rather than an update.* in particular, there is

improved advice on digital radiography and new guidance on cone beam Ct scanning.



i would like to express my appreciation on behalf of the Faculty to all who have

contributed to the production of this edition. it is my belief that this timely

publication will prove invaluable to the profession.





trevor ferguson

Dean, FGDP(UK)



*the 2018 update includes changes as a result of the ionising Radiation (Medical

Exposure) Regulations 2017 and the ionising Radiations Regulations 2017.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) ix

x Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



R E v i E W E D i t o R S





Keith horner PhD, MSc, BDS, odont Dr (hc), FRCR, FDS, DDR

Professor of oral and Maxillofacial imaging, University of Manchester.

Honorary Consultant Dental Radiologist, Manchester University nHS

Foundation trust.



Kenneth a. eaton PhD, MSc, BDS, DHC, FFGDP(UK), FFPH, FHEA, FiCD, MGDS

visiting Professor, University College London, Eastman and King’s College

London Dental institutes.

Honorary Professor, University of Kent. Member of the Board of the FGDP(UK).



A C K n o W L E D G E M E n t S



the editors would like to thank everyone who contributed to the first edition

(1998) and to the second edition (2004). there were a large number of contributors,

and they have laid the foundations for this third edition. Special thanks are due to

those who have revised or rewritten sections in this third edition. their names

appear at top of the first page of each section.



the driving force behind the first edition was Malcolm Pendlebury. it was published

during his term as the third Dean of the FGDP(UK), and his inspirational leadership

saw the development of other Faculty standards publications. the work he carried



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) xi out, together with a Faculty Expert Panel chaired by Professor nigel Pitts, has stood

the test of time and given the FGDP(UK) a clear direction for the future.



the editors and the FGDP(UK) would like to thank the following people for their

invaluable input in the development of this book.



nicholas Drage

Crawford Gray

Peter Heasman

Keith isaacson

Richard Palmer

Shanon Patel

nigel Pitts

David Ricketts

vivian Rushton

William Saunders

Ann Shearer

Andrew Shelley

Allan thom

Andy toy

Aradhna tugnait

Anne Walker

Eric Whaites



the Faculty is also indebted to the following organisations, who provided feedback

on the final draft of this book:



Associate Chief Dental officer, Scottish Government

British Association of oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons

British Dental Association

British orthodontic Society

British Society of Dental and Maxillofacial Radiology

Committee of Postgraduate Dental Deans and Directors



xii Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Dental Protection Limited

Public Health England

Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow

Society and College of Radiographers

the Society for Radiological Protection



P R o D U C t i o n t E A M



Dave o’Malley

Justine Wallis

Paul Woodcock

Charlotte Worker

Gareth Kingston

Jamie Woodward

Amy Brewerton

Smart Monkey Design



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) xiii

xiv Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



P R E F A C E t o t H E t H i R D E D i t i o n





the Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) has a commitment to improving

the standards of patient care through the provision of standards publications and

guidelines. Standards and guidelines are simply tools which a practitioner may use

to improve treatment planning and care outcomes.



Since the second edition was published in 2004, new evidence and research

findings have been published. there is now far wider use of digital radiography in

dental practices, and cone beam computed tomography has progressed significantly.

in particular, since the previous edition the European Commission has published

three new relevant sets of guidelines: Radiation Protection 136. European Guidelines

on Radiation Protection in Dental Radiology, Radiation Protection 162. Criteria for

Acceptability of Medical Radiological Equipment used in Diagnostic Radiology, Nuclear

Medicine and Radiotherapy and Radiation Protection 172. Cone Beam CT for Dental

and Maxillofacial Radiology: Evidence Based Guidelines.†



Another development since 2004 is the addition of dental radiography to the

General Dental Council’s core topics for continuing professional development for

all registrants (both dentists and dental care professionals).



the guidelines in this publication are based on the best available evidence.

However, in a number of areas the level of the evidence is still poor and based on

expert opinion. on occasion, there is therefore no one imaging strategy that can be

supported with good-quality evidence, and expert opinion differs. this constraint

is described further in the introduction that follows this preface.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) xv However, the editors wish to stress that while the contents of this publication are

based on the best available scientific knowledge, they set out guidelines for what

is currently accepted as good practice and, as such, should not be considered to

be prescriptive in all clinical circumstances.



Keith horner and Kenneth eaton



†this edition of Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography was updated in January

2018 to account for the introduction of the ionising Radiations Regulations 2017

and the ionising Radiation (Medical Exposure) Regulations 2017.



xvi Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

1 i n t R o D U C t i o n



1.1 REMit

these guidelines result from the work of an expert panel convened by the Faculty

of General Dental Practitioners (UK) in 1994 on the recommendation that “an expert

group should be set up to formulate selection criteria for dental radiology”.1 this

led to the production of two previous editions of this document, in 1998 and 2004.



the remit for the current edition is:

“to produce selection criteria which are specific to dental radiography. these

criteria should encompass all aspects of radiological practice in dentistry, with

a focus on primary dental care”.



1.2 JUStiFiCAtion in RADioLoGy

x-ray exposure involves a risk to the patient. it is essential that any x-ray examination

should show a potential net benefit to the patient, weighing the total diagnostic benefits

it produces against the detriment that the exposure might cause. the efficacy, benefits

and risk of available alternative techniques should be taken into account. this decision-

making process is called ‘justification’ and is both an ethical2 and a legal requirement.3



in order for the justification process to be carried out properly, it is essential that

selection of dental radiographs is based on the individual patient’s history and a

clinical examination. the routine use of x-rays for diagnosis based on a generalised

approach rather than individual prescription is unacceptable. A ‘routine’ (or

‘screening’) examination is one in which a radiograph is taken regardless of the

presence or absence of clinical signs and symptoms.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 1 Choosing a radiograph for a patient should also be based upon consideration of

the prevalence of diseases, their rates of progression and the diagnostic accuracy

of the imaging technique. Furthermore, where decisions are made with patients to

expose (or not to expose) a radiograph which may ultimately be contentious, a record

should be made of that discussion and decision in the notes. For example, when

looking at orthodontic cases, if the decision is not to expose a child to x-rays in the

general practice, leaving that decision to the specialist on referral, it is crucial that the

records demonstrate that. Frequently dentists are criticised for failing to identify, for

example, ectopic teeth. Equally, in pregnancy, evidence of the patient’s agreement to

a particular course of action to take (or not take) a radiograph avoids later criticism.



it should be noted that under the regulations,3 justification should include consideration

of exposures to “carers and comforters”. in a dental context this would mean, for example,

a parent supporting a child undergoing an x-ray examination.the regulations suggest

considering this person during the justification of the x-ray examination and considering

the dose that they might receive and gaining informed consent.



1.3 WHy ARE GUiDELinES nEEDED?

A useful diagnostic investigation is one where the result – positive or negative –

will alter or add confidence to a clinician’s diagnosis and/or treatment planning.

this is particularly important when x-rays are involved. At present, there is wide

variation in practice as to which radiographs are exposed in primary dental care,

and when. there is a need to minimise1 and/or prevent radiographic examinations:

• Where the results are unlikely to affect patient management and/or prognosis.

• that are repeated unnecessarily.

• that duplicate those taken previously.

• that are inappropriate.

• Where avoidable lapses in quality assurance impact upon patient dose and care.



there is also a need to ensure that radiographic information contributes to achieving

optimal standards of diagnosis and patient care, and that clinically significant

disease is not missed. this may mean that some operators should undertake more

radiographic examinations while others should undertake fewer, depending upon the



2 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) needs of their individual patients, following history taking and clinical examination.

For example, in endodontics, the use of periapical radiographs taken from different

angulations may facilitate an understanding of the root canal system, while for

patients with ongoing evidence of low caries risk, less frequent bitewing radiographs

may be needed.



it is a legal requirement that those using x-rays on patients are adequately trained,3

particularly when adopting new techniques (such as panoramic radiography or

cone beam computed tomography). Guidelines such as these can provide a useful

contribution to training.



1.4 WHAt ARE GUiDELinES?

Guidelines are systematically developed statements designed to assist the clinician

and patient in making decisions about appropriate healthcare for certain specific

clinical circumstances.4



in radiology, guidelines assist the process of selecting the appropriate imaging

pathway. Such guidelines, called ‘selection criteria’, or ‘referral criteria’, exist for both

medical and dental imaging. Radiographic referral criteria have been defined as:



“Descriptions of clinical conditions derived from patient signs, symptoms and

history that identify patients who are likely to benefit from a particular radiographic

technique.”5



Every dental practice using x-rays for diagnosis must have radiographic referral

guidelines.3 As with any guideline, selection criteria are not intended to be rigid

constraints on clinical practice, but “a concept of good practice against which the

needs of the individual patient can be considered”.6 the term ‘referral criteria’

is appropriate for medical practitioners, where radiography is usually arranged

by referral to a specialist in radiology. in primary dental care, referral to another

clinician is not normal, so the term ‘selection criteria’ is widely used. in some cases,

however, a practitioner may refer a patient to a colleague or to a hospital x-ray

department for imaging, eg. for panoramic radiography or cone beam computed



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 3 tomography (CBCt). When referring patients in this way, they should ensure that

adequate clinical information about the patient is provided to the person taking

responsibility for the exposure. A request to, for example, “please take a panoramic

radiograph for diagnosis” would not be considered adequate clinical information.



1.5 WHy EviDEnCE-BASED GUiDELinES?

there is increasing acceptance in medicine7 and dentistry8 that diagnostic and

laboratory tests, clinical decisions and clinical practice should all be as ‘evidence-

based’ as possible. this stance is supported by the UK Health Departments8 and

the Royal Colleges10R following lessons learned from clinical treatments that have

subsequently been found to be ineffective and costly.



the evidence-based approach is not without problems, including the lack of high-

quality research evidence in a number of clinical fields. the FGDP(UK) guidelines

programme follows the SiGn (Scottish intercollegiate Guidelines network) approach

to methodology11 wherever possible, and adapts this, in a pragmatic way, to the

particular area under review.



the scientific methodology of systematic reviews has developed dramatically in the

last two decades and there are now established and rigorous methods that seek

to ensure that the inherent (and often unintended) biases associated with many

traditional reviews and professional panels are controlled effectively. SiGn was

established in 1993 by the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges and their faculties in

Scotland to support the development of national guidelines on a multi-professional

basis. it is now seen as an international leader in this methodology. the key element

of such guidelines is explicitly to link recommendations with levels of evidence and

best practice for the delivery of patient-centred care.



in preparing this edition, due attention was paid to two highly relevant European

guideline documents,5R,12R both produced using rigorous systematic review and

SiGn methodology. the first5R deals with dental radiography in general, while the

second12R addresses the specific challenges of dental CBCt.



4 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 1.6 iMPLEMEntAtion AnD AUDit

in order to influence practice positively and be of use in primary care, guidelines

must be turned into useful aids for the provision of clinical care. this can best be

done locally at a practice or clinic level.



Using the SiGn methodology and framework, a ‘national guideline’ is a series of broad

statements that relate to the optimal level of care. ‘Local guidelines’ (protocols)

are more detailed developments of these evidence-based broad principles for local

application in individual practices.



in order to establish whether the national and local guidelines have had any

effect, it is imperative that individual practitioners audit appropriate topics related

to their implementation. Suggestions for possible audit topics are set out in Section 9.



1.7 REviEW oF GUiDELinES

the first edition of Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography, published in 1998, set out

to achieve much at a time when dental services and practices were evolving and when

new research evidence was constantly being produced. A second edition, published in

2004, presented an update incorporating new evidence and developments, including

the more widespread use of digital radiography. Since then, there have been a

number of developments and some enhancement of the level of evidence to support

recommendations. the developments include far greater use of digital radiography in

dental practice. A 2010 paper13 suggested that in West Kent, 50% of general dentists used

digital radiography. CBCt has also emerged and its use may well become more common

over the next few years.



this third edition continues the process of review and evolution of the guidelines,

taking such developments into consideration. in spite of the publication of a number of

research projects on dental radiography, however, the level of evidence for the choice of

particular types of radiographs in the oral cavity is sometimes still supported by clinical

opinions rather than hard science. throughout this book, where there is little evidence

to support one type of radiography over another, this will be highlighted.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 5 1.8 UnDERStAnDinG tHE GUiDELinES

As was the case with previous editions, it should be clearly understood that the

approach adopted for different sections within this publication has not been

uniform. this is because the volume of evidence available for review varies, as

does the priority of the topics in terms of balancing risk and benefit. Some sections

include more comprehensive sifting of the evidence, while others rely more heavily

on expert opinion and conventional literature review.



the levels of evidence supporting each recommendation within this publication

are indicated throughout, as shown in table 1.1. this approach is consistent with

the SiGn system of classification.11



1.9 GUiDELinE MEtHoDoLoGy

in order to provide guidelines in an evidence-based manner, much time and effort is

expended. the dental literature was searched and appraised in a systematic fashion



Table 1.1: Levels of evidence supporting recommendations



A GrADe requires at least one randomised controlled trial as part of the body of literature, of overall good quality and consistency, addressing the specific recommendations



B GrADe

requires availability of well-conducted clinical studies but no

randomised clinical trials on the topic of recommendation



C GrADe requires evidence obtained from expert committee reports or opinions and/or clinical experiences of respected authorities. Indicates absence of directly applicable clinical studies of good quality



6 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) to produce most of the recommendations made in this publication. References are

indicated within the text by superscript numbering, in some cases along with the

letter ‘R’ to indicate that the publication in question is a review article. Where relevant

literature could not be identified for review, the authors have attempted to provide

recommendations based on ‘best practice’ or expert opinion, following consultation

with specialty groups.



At the very least, review questions for each subject area were set (table 1.2). Literature

was identified in a systematic manner by accessing electronic databases (MEDLinE,

Embase, index to Scientific & technical Proceedings, Science Citation index, and Social

Sciences Citation index). the publications deemed to be relevant to the carefully set

review questions were critically appraised and recommendations were made from

the strongest ones.



Table 1.2: Review questions



review For all new, recall or emergency patients attending primary

question dental care:



1 When are radiographs indicated in order that a useful diagnostic

yield will be generated (in comparison to the conventional

clinical examination, with or without assistance from other

methods) and thus contribute usefully to individual patient care

plans for maintaining and improving dental health?



2 What significant additional age-related risk will follow from

exposure to different dental radiographic projections?



3 What evidence exists to influence or support selection criteria

by specialty area, in order to contribute usefully to individual

patient care plans for maintaining and improving dental health?



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 7 1.10 GAPS in tHE EviDEnCE

the previous edition in 2004 identified gaps in the evidence where research was

needed. Many of these remain unanswered and, with the availability of CBCt, new

evidence needs have arisen. the following are suggestions for future research:

• the value of radiographs in periodontology

• Prevalence of hidden dentine caries (especially in low-prevalence groups)

• Caries-related data of individuals in their early twenties (and older)

• Crown and bridgework radiographs

• Practical caries risk assessment in primary care

• the need for a pre-extraction radiograph

• Economic evaluations (cost-benefit analysis) of dental imaging

• Application of alternatives to radiography for caries detection

• Clinical trials of patient clinical outcomes when using CBCt compared with

conventional radiographs

• Research on image quality requirements of CBCt for different clinical applications



1.11 ovERviEW oF RECoMMEnDAtionS

An overview of the recommendations appears as Appendix 1.



8 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 1.12 REFEREnCES

1. national radiological Protection Board (nrPB). Guidelines on radiology Standards for Primary

Dental Care: report by the royal College of radiologists and nrPB. Documents of the nrPB: 5(3).

Chilton: nrPB; 1994.

2. International Atomic energy Agency. Justification of medical exposure in diagnostic imaging.

Vienna: IAeA, 2011. Available at: www-pub.iaea.org/MtCD/Publications/PDF/Pub1532_web.pdf.

Accessed: August 2012.

3. the Ionising radiation (Medical exposure) regulations 2017. London, Department of Health: 2017. 4. Field MJ, Lohr Kn. Guidelines for clinical practice: from development to use. Washington DC:

national Academic Press; 1992.

5. [r] european Commission. radiation Protection 136: european Guidelines on radiation Protection in

Dental radiology. Luxembourg: Publications office of the european Union; 2004. Available at: http://

ec.europa.eu/energy/nuclear/radioprotection/publication/doc/136_en.pdf. Accessed: August 2012. 6. royal College of radiologists. Medical audit in radiodiagnosis. London: rCr; 1990. 7. Sackett DL, rosenberg WMC, Gray JAM, Haynes rB, richardson WS. evidence-based medicine: what

it is and what it isn’t. BMJ 1996;312:71–2.

8. richards D, Lawrence A. evidence-based dentistry. Br Dent J 1995;179:270–3. 9. Department of Health. research and development: towards an evidence-based health service.

London: DH; 1995.

10. [r] Sackett DL, rosenberg WMC. the need for evidence-based medicine. J r Soc Med 1995;88:620–4. 11. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines network. SIGn 50: A guideline developers’ handbook, revised ed.

edinburgh: SIGn; 2008.

12. [r] european Commission. radiation Protection 172. Cone beam Ct for dental and maxillofacial

radiology: evidence based guidelines. Luxembourg: european Commission; 2012. Available at:

https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/172.pdf . Accessed: January 2018 13. Mauthe P, eaton KA. An investigation into dental digital radiography in dental practices in west

Kent following the introduction of the 2006 nHS General Dental Services contract. Prim Dent Care

2011;18:73–82.



note: [r] indicates a review publication.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 9

10 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



2 U S E o F i o n i S i n G R A D i A t i o n



2.1 RADiAtion DoSES AnD RiSKS in DEntAL PRACtiCE

Nicholas Drage and Anne Walker



2.1.1 Introduction

Radiography is an invaluable tool for the clinician, providing information that

is impossible to obtain by clinical examination alone. of all the x-ray examinations

carried out in the UK, around 26% are taken by general dental practitioners.1 in

2008, it was estimated that 20.5 million dental radiographs were taken by dentists

in nHS and private practice, and of these 2.7 million were panoramic radiographs.1

Consequently dentists, equipment manufacturers, medical physics experts and

radiation protection advisers need to work to keep radiation doses and risks as low

as reasonably practicable. if selection criteria are used properly, the collective dose

to the population is reduced, since unnecessary or unproductive x-ray examinations

are eliminated.



x-rays are a type of electromagnetic (EM) radiation. EM radiation also includes visible

light, radiowaves, microwaves, cosmic radiation and several other varieties of ‘rays’. All

can be considered as ‘packets’ of energy, called photons, which have wave properties,

most importantly a wavelength and frequency. x-rays are short-wavelength, high-

frequency EM radiation. the importance of this is that high frequency means high

energy. When x-rays hit atoms this energy can be transferred, causing ionisation of

the atoms.



2.1.2 Radiation damage

An x-ray beam consists of millions of high-energy photons. these can damage

molecules by ionisation of atoms, but damage to the DnA in the chromosomes



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 11 is of particular importance. Most DnA damage is successfully repaired, but rarely a

portion of a chromosome may be permanently altered (a mutation). this may lead to

uncontrolled cell replication, ultimately leading to the formation of a tumour. the latent

period between exposure to x-rays and diagnosis of a tumour may be many years. the

probability of a tumour being produced is related to the radiation dose, so knowledge

of the doses delivered is important. Such effects where the magnitude of the risk is

related to dose can be considered as ‘chance’ (stochastic) effects. For these effects there

is no clear evidence of the existence of a safe level of radiation dose,2,3 ie. it is currently

assumed that any level of dose could lead to tumour induction. However, the lower the

radiation dose, the lower the risk of radiation-induced tumours.



there is strong, well documented epidemiological evidence that exposure to radiation

at doses above some tens of millisieverts is associated with an increased risk of cancer.4

Studies have shown increased cancer risk associated with Ct scans in childhood and

raised levels of exposure to background radiation.5,6 Dose levels associated with dental

radiology are even smaller; however, a number of epidemiological studies have

provided evidence of a possible increased risk of brain, salivary gland and thyroid

tumours related to dental radiography.7–16



Another stochastic effect is that of heritable damage seen in the children of irradiated

parents. As the radiation dose to the reproductive organs is so low in dental

examinations, the risk of heritable effects is negligible.17R



there are other known damaging effects of radiation, such as skin erythema, hair

loss and effects on fertility, that definitely have threshold doses below which they

will not occur. As dental radiography would never exceed these thresholds which

are some thousands of millisieverts, except in extraordinary circumstances, these

tissue reactions or deterministic effects are given no further consideration. Cataract

formation was, until recently, believed to have a similar threshold; however, the

evidence has indicated a threshold of about 500 mSv, a factor of three lower than

previously thought.2,18 this level is still well above that observed in dental radiography,

but risk of cataract induction could become a concern if many repeated CBCt or Ct

examinations which included the orbits were undertaken.



12 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 2.1.3 Radiation dose

the term ‘dose’ is widely used but often misunderstood. there are three common

terms used to describe dose: absorbed dose, equivalent dose and effective dose.



ABSoRBED DoSE (D)

of the three dose quantities, this is the only one that can be directly measured. the

absorbed dose is the mean energy imparted to a unit mass of matter (eg. tissue) by

the ionising radiation.2 the units of measurement are joules per kilogram (J/kg),

which are called grays (Gy).



EqUivALEnt DoSE (H ) t

Some types of ionising radiation are more damaging to tissue than others. this is

taken into account when making dose calculations by weighting the absorbed dose

depending on the type of radiation used. For instance, alpha particles will potentially

cause much more biological damage than x-rays for the same absorbed dose, and

so they are given a weighting 20 times that of x-ray photons. For dental radiography,

which only uses x-rays, the absorbed dose and the equivalent dose are numerically

the same. Equivalent dose is still measured in J/kg, but its unit is given the special

name of sievert (Sv).



EFFECtivE DoSE (E)

Different tissues of the body are more susceptible to the effects of ionising

radiation than others. this is taken into account when calculating the effective

dose. the international Commission on Radiological Protection (iCRP) has published

revised tissue weighting factors for the most radiosensitive tissues of the body.2 the

modifications were introduced mainly on the basis of new epidemiological evidence

of cancer induction in the survivors of the Japanese atomic bombs. the main changes

relevant to the calculation of effective dose from dental radiography are the addition

of the salivary glands as an individual weighted tissue and the inclusion of the oral

mucosa in the remainder tissues. Consequently, effective doses calculated using the

current iCRP recommendations for dental exposures are significantly higher than using

the previous weighting factors.19–21 therefore, caution must be taken when trying to

compare effective doses calculated using different weighting factors.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 13 in dentistry, the effective dose is often small, so it is more appropriate to use

subunits such as the millisievert (mSv) which is one thousandth of a Sv, or the

microsievert (µSv), which is one millionth of a Sv.



2.1.4 Factors influencing effective dose

the radiation dose delivered for a specific imaging requirement can be determined

by a range of factors, some related to the equipment type and design, others to the

operator’s use of the equipment. they can be grouped into three categories:

• the sensitivity of the image receptor – using a high-speed (ie. more sensitive )

system will reduce the dose required.

• the area exposed to the primary beam – reducing the volume exposed and

ensuring that more sensitive organs are in areas of lower dose will limit the

effective dose.

• the exposure factors selected – selecting equipment settings that give lower

dose while maintaining adequate image quality.



Correct selection of equipment and technique can significantly reduce the patient

dose. However, dose should not be reduced to such a level that the image quality

is not adequate for the clinical purpose. there is a balance between radiation dose

and image quality, and the operator must be trained to understand how the factors

interact to optimise the imaging process.



intRAoRAL RADioGRAPHy

it is recommended that intraoral dental x-ray equipment should have the following

design features:22

• Equipment should operate at a voltage between 60–70kv.

• Constant potential units are preferred to generators with pulsating waveforms.

• the beam must be adequately filtered using an appropriate thickness of

aluminium.

• An open-ended spacer cone should be used in conjunction with rectangular

collimation.

• A long focus-to-skin distance should be used (200mm for sets operating between

60–70 kv).



14 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

• A range of available exposure times of sufficiently fine graduations to produce

optimally exposed radiographs over the full range of possible patient sizes,

anatomical views and speeds of imaging system.



in addition, a sensitive image detector system should be used, such as F-speed film

or a digital detector. the use of modern equipment combined with good technique

and sensitive detectors can make a tenfold difference to the effective dose.19 A

national review of dose in dental practice in the UK found that the average dose for

an adult molar setting had decreased by 57% since 1999 as a result of the adoption

of new equipment and more sensitive image detectors.23



A number of studies have compared doses in digital and film intraoral radiography

in which the dose reduction offered by digital over conventional film ranged between

20–70%.24,25 However, Berkhout et al 24 put forward the caveat that in practice it is

likely that the overall dose reduction is less than 25%, owing to the tendency to take

more images when using digital systems. in addition, owing to the greater range of

dose that will give acceptable images, care must be taken to use the level of dose that

will give an acceptable image as opposed to the best image, which is likely to be at a

significantly higher dose.26



PAnoRAMiC AnD CEPHALoMEtRiC RADioGRAPHy

there are also marked differences in the doses associated with different panoramic

machines, primarily related to the speed of the detector and the selection of beam

sizes available.27 Modern film screen systems have speeds very similar to current

digital detectors, and it is unlikely that the introduction of digital technology will

see the same dose reduction in either panoramic or cephalometric radiography

as is currently being experienced in intraoral radiography.27



ConE BEAM CoMPUtED toMoGRAPHy

CBCt is the most significant development in dental and maxillofacial imaging in

recent years. the first commercially available machine on the market was introduced

in the late 1990s, and there are now a large number of manufacturers producing CBCt

machines. High-resolution, three-dimensional images of teeth and jaws are produced.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 15 Consequently, there are several applications of CBCt in dentistry including endodontics,

orthodontic diagnosis and the assessment of the jaw prior to implant placement.28–30

the European Commission has produced evidence-based referral criteria to clarify those

clinical situations in which CBCt may be useful.31R CBCt units are significantly cheaper

than medical Ct machines and have a much smaller footprint. these features, combined

with the potential for increased diagnostic yield, make these systems attractive to

dentists working outside the hospital sector.



the effective dose from CBCt is dependent on many factors, with one of the main

ones being the volume of tissue irradiated. the volume of tissue that is irradiated

is often referred to as the field of view (Fov). Comparison of effective dose with respect

to Fov size is shown in table 2.1. there is a marked range in the effective doses in each

category because of differences in the equipment being used, including the detector

type and the scanning parameters selected (tube current, voltage and time of exposure,

including the number of projections obtained).



in addition, for small Fov scanners the dose varies depending on the region of the jaw

being scanned.47 Some machines allow a choice of exposure factors and offer a wide

choice of Fovs, while on other units these features are either fixed or there is a limited

choice. these factors must be one of the prime considerations when considering buying

such a unit. it is important that the exposure factors and Fov are optimised to the clinical

question being investigated.31R,60 there is no need for the routine use of lead aprons

for patients undergoing CBCt examinations.31R,60 However, there is some evidence to

support the use of a thyroid shield for CBCt, as this may reduce the effective dose by up

to 40%.58,61 if a thyroid shield is used, it must be positioned carefully so as not to cause

artefacts on the images or obscure areas of interest.60



the effective dose from medical Ct is generally higher than that from CBCt. However,

scanning parameters can be optimised to reduce the dose considerably,50,62–64 with

the advantage that soft–tissue differentiation is still possible even with low

exposure factors.



16 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

Table 2.1: Effective doses for traditional dental radiography, CBCT and CT

examinations – tabular summary of literature review



radiographic technique effective references

dose (µSv)

Intraoral radiograph (bitewing/ 0.3–21.6 19,32,33 periapical)

Panoramic radiograph 2.7–38 19,21,32–42

Lateral cephalometric radiograph 2.2–14 19,36,42–46

CBCt (small field of view*) 11–214 35,47–53

CBCt (medium field of view**) 18–674 20,35,37,42,47–55

CBCt (large field of view***) 60–510.6 20,21,35,41,51,52,54–56

CBCt (extended field of view****) 30–1025 20,21,41,42,46,47,54–58

Ct scan (mandible) 250–1410 34,36,47,50

Ct Scan (mandible and maxilla) 430–860 35,54,59



* the height of cylindrical volume or spherical diameter of the volume ≤ 5cm

** the height of cylindrical volume or spherical diameter of the volume > 5cm and ≤ 10cm.

*** the height of cylindrical volume or spherical diameter of the volume > 10cm and ≤15cm

**** the height of cylindrical volume or spherical diameter of the volume > 15cm



2.1.5 The risks

it is useful to understand the magnitude of the risk associated with dental

radiography when considering the justification of individual dental exposures and

the effect of dental exposures on the whole population. Risk factors are regularly

published and are constantly being refined as new data becomes available and more

sophisticated modelling is undertaken.2,65



As discussed in Section 2.1.2, above, the risk associated with dental radiography is

primarily that of cancer induction. A publication by the UK Health Protection Agency

proposes the use of a total lifetime cancer induction risk factor for an average 30-to-

39-year-old of 6.8% per Sv for men and 5.5% per Sv for women for radiography of the

head.65 Another way of expressing this is to say that there is a 1 in 15,000 (for men)



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 17 and 1 in 18,000 (for women) risk of a cancer being induced for every 1mSv effective

dose received from dental radiography.



Risk is age-dependent, being highest for the young and lowest for the elderly. the

tissues of younger people are more radiosensitive and their prospective life span

is likely to exceed the latent period. For the very elderly, life expectancy will be

less than the latency period, which can be anything from five years upwards and

the risk could be considered negligible. in general, young children are at about

two to three times the risk of develop radiation-induced cancer than adults in

their thirties for the same effective dose,65 hence the importance of using specific

paediatric exposure protocols when radiographing children to ensure that the dose

is minimised.



there is often considerable concern about radiography during pregnancy because

of possible risk to the foetus. in dental radiography, it is unusual for an x-ray beam

to be pointed at the abdomen (only for vertex occlusal radiographs, which are

rarely indicated) and, in those cases where radiography is essential, abdominal lead

protection should be used when a foetus lies in the primary beam.22 For all other

dental radiographic views, including panoramic and CBCt examinations, there

is no requirement to delay radiography until after the birth. However, as the subject

of radiography during pregnancy is emotive, it is recommended that practitioners

offer pregnant patients the option of delaying non-urgent radiography.66,67



table 2.1 gives typical doses for radiographic examinations of teeth and jaws, including

dental radiographic techniques likely to be used in primary dental care. the doses have

been calculated either using the current iCRP recommendations or, in those studies

that predate these recommendations, those ones that include weighting factors for

the salivary glands. Effective doses are calculated for a reference patient and there are

many uncertainties in the calculations. Risk estimates for an individual based on the

calculated effective dose may be higher or lower by a factor of five.68 For this reason,

risk has been split into broad categories to indicate the health detriment.68 the risk

from dental radiography falls into the lowest risk category. Even the risk from medical

Ct of the jaws is considered very low. However low the risk from the examination, it is



18 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) imperative that each radiographic exposure is fully justified and the doses optimised to

reduce the detrimental effects to the lowest possible level.



2.1.6 Diagnostic reference levels

Surveys of dental radiography practice have consistently shown a significant variation

in dose for the same examinations between dental practices. in the 2005 survey of

dental practices, the dose for the same intraoral dental radiographic examination

varied by a factor of 600 between the lowest and highest doses.27



the concept of diagnostic reference levels (DRLs) has been developed in response

to such wide variations in patient doses to provide an audit standard. national

reference levels for conventional dental radiography are based on the third-quartile

values for the distribution of doses found in such surveys, ie. 75% of equipment gives

doses below the reference value.69,70 Auditing patient dose and comparison with

locally-set DRLs is a legal requirement in the UK.71,72 those dentists with equipment

giving doses above the local DRL need to investigate the cause and instigate

measures to reduce the doses to below the local DRL. For general dental practice it

is recommended that these national reference levels are adopted as the local DRLs,

ie. local audit standards,22 unless local measurements of patient doses support the

adoption of lower values. this should be determined with the help of your medical

physics expert. the current recommended national reference levels for dental

radiography are shown in table 2.2 (overleaf).



Audit data are not yet available for the establishment of a national DRL for CBCt.

However, local DRLs should be set up with the help of a medical physics expert.74 the

Health Protection Agency (now part of Public Health England) carried out an initial

analysis and recommended an achievable dose based on the ability to collimate to

the area of clinical interest.74



there have been some encouraging signs from the 2005 and 2010 surveys.23,27 in

comparison to the 1999 survey, there has been an overall reduction of dose arising

from intraoral radiography, mainly due to the higher voltage of the x-ray machines

used, the use of faster film and the increased use of digital radiography.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 19

Table 2.2: Suggested national diagnostic reference levels for dental radiography



examination national Diagnostic reference Level references

Intraoral (adult molar) 1.7 mGy* 23

Panoramic (adult) 2 93 mGy cm ** 23

Panoramic (child) 2 67 mGy cm ** 23

Lateral cephalometric 2 40 mGy cm 73 radiograph (adult)

Lateral cephalometric 2 25 mGy cm 73 radiograph (child)

Achievable Dose

CBCt (adult upper first 2 250 mGy cm ** 73 molar implant)



* measured as the absorbed dose in air at the end of the spacer cone

** measured as the dose area product (DAP)



2.1.7 Doses and risks in context

Life is a risky business. We are all constantly exposed to naturally occuring

background radiation, which averages about 2230 μSv each year in the UK.75 Medical

exposures (including dental) add around 18% to this figure on average (per UK

citizen) and this proportion continues to rise, primarily due to the increased use of

Ct scanners.75 With this in mind a periapical radiograph may be associated with an

effective dose up to three and a half days’ background radiation and a panoramic

radiograph equivalent to no more than six days’ background radiation. the effective

dose from a CBCt examination is comparable to between two days’ and six months’

additional background radiation, depending on the machine used and the exposure

parameters selected. For comparative purposes, a chest x-ray (18 μSv) is equivalent to

around three days of additional background radiation, while some medical computed

tomography examinations equate to over ten years’ background radiation.76–78



20 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Unfortunately, one in four people in the UK die from cancer.79 Radiography

increases the chance of developing cancer, and it is estimated that diagnostic

radiology (medical and dental) causes 700 cancer cases per year in the UK.80 the

collective dose to the population from dental radiography is low so only a small

proportion of these cancers can be attributed to dental radiography.81 However,

choosing to radiograph a patient and selecting the technique and its frequency should

be a matter of balancing the risk against the clinical benefits to that patient.



A no patient should be expected to receive additional radiation dose and risk as part of a course of dental treatment unless they are likely to benefit from dental radiography. notwithstanding the already low individual risk, every effort

should be made to undertake the radiography at minimum

dose to the patient. the lowest-dose examination that will

answer the clinical question should always be undertaken.*



*this important statement is given the highest level of recommendation even though there are no randomised controlled trials to support it. Such a study design would be neither possible nor ethical.



2.2 tHE USE oF PAnoRAMiC RADioGRAPHy

Vivian Rushton



Panoramic radiography has become a well-established radiographic technique in general

dental practice. one study has found that 63% of general dental practitioners routinely

screened their new adult patients using panoramic radiography.82 this increase in

panoramic screening is not surprising, since as long ago as 2003, 61% of general dental

practitioners had access to this type of radiographic equipment.83



As with all radiographic examinations, it is important to strike a balance between the

radiation dose received by the patient and the likely diagnostic benefit. As detailed in



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 21 table 2.1, panoramic equipment delivers a wide range of dose to patients depending

on the type of equipment used, with newer panoramic units more likely to incorporate

dose-limiting features. irrespective of these developments, within the last ten years

radiation dose reduction from panoramic radiography has been low (<10%),27 in part

because some digital panoramic systems may require an increase in exposure factors

compared with fast screen/film combinations.70



there is continuing evidence of poor image quality of panoramic radiographs

taken in primary dental care.84,85 Any faults in the radiograph will inevitably lead to

a reduction in the diagnostic value of the examination. it is essential that particular

care should be taken in monitoring and maintaining high image quality by paying

close attention to correct positioning of the patient and, for film-based radiography, by

ensuring the best possible processing techniques. the dental practice should also employ

a robust quality assurance programme. the latter is a statutory requirement of the

ionising Radiations Regulations 2017.71



C Routine monitoring of panoramic image quality is essential in order to maximise diagnostic value.* * While there is insufficient research to support a higher grading for this statement, it is a requirement of current legislation. 71



2.2.1 The new patient to the practice

in some centres, it has become routine to take a panoramic radiograph of all new

patients. Research has shown that intraoral (bitewing and periapical) radiographs

are superior to panoramic radiographs for the diagnosis of common dental pathosis

(caries, periodontal and periapical pathology).86R,87-89 However, a high proportion of

dentists rely on panoramic radiography alone to assess common dental pathosis.90



Some dentists use panoramic radiography routinely to ‘screen’ the jaws for clinically

unsuspected pathology.90 it is possible that anecdotal evidence of identifying a cyst

or other unusual lesion in a patient may reinforce this attitude. this standpoint,



22 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) however, ignores the low prevalence of asymptomatic pathology. Routine radiography

without the presence of clinical signs or symptoms cannot be justified.86R, 91 this has

long been recognised in medical radiological practice, resulting in the cessation of

screening practices, except for those national screening programmes with a strong

evidence base, such as the Breast Screening Programme.



it can be argued that a panoramic radiograph may be appropriate for the patient

who presents with a grossly neglected mouth with significant numbers of clinically

determined caries lesions and periapical pathosis, along with established periodontal

disease (other than simple gingivitis).92,93 in these cases, it may be expeditious to use

panoramic radiography as a means of identifying teeth requiring a more detailed

(intraoral) radiographic examination or, when limited to a hospital setting, prior to

dental surgery under general anaesthesia.



2.2.2 The edentulous patient

in the absence of any clinical signs or symptoms, there is no justification for any

radiographic examination,94 unless implant treatment is planned (see Section 8).

Where clinical examination identifies the possible presence of an abnormality, such

as a possible retained root, then an intraoral radiograph of the site is the appropriate

radiographic examination.



2.2.3 The orthodontic patient

A panoramic radiograph is commonly used to provide information on the state

of the developing dentition and is often appropriate when orthodontic treatment

is being considered. this is considered fully in Section 3.



Several studies have examined the efficacy of radiography, including panoramic,

in orthodontic practice.95–100 the researchers reported the limited effect radiography

has on changing orthodontic diagnosis or treatment plans. Although radiography

has an undoubted role in orthodontic practice, such research questions whether

the present use of radiography may be excessive. Routine screening of children

cannot be justified and the use of selection criteria100 has been found to be effective

in determining those children likely to benefit from a radiographic examination.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 23 Guidance from the British orthodontic Society reflects this approach.101



2.2.4 Prior to oral surgery

Routine radiography of unerupted third molars is not recommended.102 the

panoramic radiograph is commonly used to assess third molars prior to their

surgical removal but does not need to be carried out at the initial examination.102 in

the case of mandibular third molars, the radiograph will provide information about

the distance to the lower border of the mandible and the limited information about

the course and relationship with the inferior dental canal. With the latter, it should

be noted that panoramic radiography does not provide an accurate indication

of a close relationship.103–105 in those surgical cases in which there is a suggestion

of a close relationship between the root apices and the mandibular canal, either

a second radiograph, using different projection geometry,105 or, if available, a

localised CBCt examination31R should be performed if this is likely to result in a

change in surgical management. there is a risk of localised CBCt examinations

becoming standard “defensive” practice. it is emphasised that there is no evidence

to support the use of CBCt routinely in these cases, nor any evidence of any

improvement in patient outcomes when CBCt is used in such situations.



in other surgical situations, such as apicectomy, root removal or enucleation

of small cysts, an intraoral radiograph may be all that is required for treatment

planning and the use of panoramic radiography would not normally be needed.



2.2.5 Trauma

For simple dental trauma, intraoral radiography will provide the greatest diagnostic

detail. A panoramic radiograph is, however, the first-choice method for imaging

mandibular fractures,106,107 although poor panoramic image quality has been shown

to limit diagnostic accuracy.108 Supplementary imaging is often required to diagnose

high condylar fractures.107,109,110 Panoramic radiography has a limited ability to detect

mid-facial fractures. if there is clinical evidence of a bone fracture, it is probably

more appropriate to refer the patient for a complete radiographic examination

at the hospital, where treatment will be performed.



24 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 2.2.6 Temporomandibular joint problems

the panoramic radiograph shows an image of the mandibular condyles and is often

used as a first-choice imaging technique for those patients with tMJ symptoms.

A study of patients with tMJ symptoms has found, however, that panoramic

radiography provided little or no information that influenced diagnosis or patient

management in most cases examined.111



the overwhelming majority of patients with symptoms and signs related to the tMJ

region are suffering from myofacial pain/dysfunction or internal disc derangements.

Condylar abnormality is not seen in the former and only occasionally in the latter.

Radiography is not recommended for patients with joint sounds (‘clicking’) in the

absence of other signs or symptoms.112,113 Radiographic examination is indicated

where there is recent evidence of progressive pathology (recent trauma, change

in occlusion, mandibular shift, sensory or motor alterations, change in range of

movement).



2.2.7 Conclusions

Panoramic radiological examinations are performed on large numbers of patients

either as an alternative, or as a supplement, to intraoral radiography. the criteria

used in the decision to take a panoramic radiograph may be specific clinical indicators

or an indiscriminate ‘screening’ procedure for pathology. the many published studies

on the diagnostic accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of panoramic radiology compared

to intraoral radiographic examinations indicate that it is generally inferior in the

imaging of the dental diseases with the greatest prevalence.



A All patients must have a history taken and clinical examination performed prior to panoramic radiography. Where radiographs are clinically indicated in dental practice, intraoral radiography should be considered the optimal radiographic examination because of better detail and lower radiation doses.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 25 Panoramic radiography should not be seen as a routine radiographic technique for

general dental practice, but rather one selected for specific situations on the basis of

clinical history and examination. table 2.3 suggests some selection criteria.



Table 2.3: Suggested selection criteria for panoramic radiography and the

level of evidence supporting the recommendation.



Criterion evidence grade



Where a bony lesion or unerupted tooth is of a size or

position that precludes its complete demonstration on C intraoral radiographs.



In patients with a grossly neglected dentition, for whom

there is a clinically determined likelihood of multiple C extractions being required.



For the assessment of third molars prior to planned

surgical intervention. routine radiography of unerupted B third molars is not recommended.



As part of an orthodontic assessment where there is a

clinical need to know the state of the dentition and the

presence/absence of teeth. the use of clinical criteria to C select patients rather than routine screening is essential

(see Section 3).



Panoramic radiographs should only be taken in the



presence of specific clinical signs and symptoms. there is no B justification for review panoramic radiography at arbitrary

time intervals.



26 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 2.3 REFEREnCES

1. Hart D, Wall BF, Miller MC, Shrimpton PC. HPA–CrCe–012. Frequency and collective dose for

medical and dental x-ray examinations in the UK, 2008. Chilton: HPA; 2010. 2. the 2007 recommendations of the International Commission on radiological Protection. ICrP

Publication 103. Ann ICrP 2007;37:1–332.

3. european Commission. radiation Protection 125: Low dose ionizing radiation and cancer risk.

Luxembourg: office for official Publications of the european Communities; 2001. 4. Mobbs SF, Muirhead Cr, Harrison JD. risks from ionising radiation. HPA–rPD–066. Chilton: HPA;

2010. Available from: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/125.pdf (Accessed

January 2018).

5. Pearce MS, Salotti JA, Little MP, McHugh K, Lee C, Kim KP et al. exposure from Ct scans in childhood

and subsequent risk of leukaemia and brain tumours: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet

2012;380:499–505.

6. Kendall GM, Little MP, Wakeford r, Bunch KJ, Miles JCH, Vincent tJ et al. A record based case-

control study of natural background radiation and the incidence of childhood leukaemia and other

cancers in Great Britain during 1980–2006. Leukemia 2013;27:3–9. 7. Preston-Martin S, White SC. Brain and salivary gland tumors related to prior dental radiography:

implications for current practice. J Am Dent Assoc 1990;120:151–158. 8. Longstreth Wt, Dennis LK, McGuire VM, Drangsholt Mt, Koepsell tD. epidemiology of intracranial

meningioma. Cancer 1993;72:639–648.

9. Longstreth Wt Jr, Phillips Le, Drangsholt M, Koepsell tD, Custer BS, Gehrels JA et al. Dental

x-rays and the risk of intracranial meningioma: a population-based case-control study. Cancer

2004;100:1026–34.

10. ryan P, Lee MW, north B, McMichael AJ. Amalgam fillings, diagnostic dental x-rays and tumours

of the brain and meninges. eur J Cancer B oral oncol 1992;28B:91–5. 11. Claus eB, Calvocoressi L, Bondy ML, Schildkraut JM, Wiemels JL, Wrensch M. Dental x-rays and risk

of meningioma. Cancer 2012;118:4530–7.

12. Preston-Martin S, thomas DC, White SC, Cohen D. Prior exposure to medical and dental x-rays

related to tumors of the parotid gland. J natl Cancer Inst 1988;80:943–949. 13. Horn-ross PL, Ljung BM, Morrow M. environmental factors and the risk of salivary gland cancer.

epidemiology 1997;8:414–419.

14. Hallquist A, Hardell L, Degerman A, Wingren G, Boquist L. Medical diagnostic and therapeutic

ionizing radiation and the risk for thyroid cancer: a case-control study. eur J Cancer Prev

1994;3:259–267.

15. Wingren G, Hallquist A, Hardell L. Diagnostic x-ray exposure and female papillary thyroid cancer:

a pooled analysis of two Swedish studies. eur J Cancer Prev 1997;6:550–556. 16. Memon A, Godward S, Williams D, Siddique I, Al-Saleh K. Dental x-rays and the risk of thyroid

cancer: a case control study. Acta oncologica 2010;49:447–453.

17. [r] White SC. 1992 Assessment of radiation risk from dental radiography. Dentomaxillofac radiol

1992;21:118–126.

18. International Commision on radiological Protection. 2011 Statement on tissue reactions. Available

at http://www.icrp.org/page.asp?id=123 Accessed: March, 2013.

19. Ludlow JB, Davies-Ludlow Le, White SC. Patient risk related to common dental radiographic

examinations: the impact of 2007 International Commission on radiological Protection

recommendations regarding dose calculation. J Am Dent Assoc 2008;139:1237–43. 20. roberts JA, Drage nA, Davies J, thomas DW. effective dose from cone beam Ct examinations in



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 27

dentistry. Br J radiol 2009;82:35–40.

21. Ludlow JB, Davies-Ludlow Le, Brooks SL, Howerton WB. Dosimetry of three CBCt devices for

oral and maxillofacial radiology: CB Mercuray, newtom 3G and i-CAt.Dentomaxillofac radiol

2006;35:219–26. erratum in: Dentomaxillofac radiol. 2006;35:392. 22. national radiological Protection Board. Guidance notes for dental practitioners on the safe use of

x-ray equipment. nrPB. London: Department of Health; 2001.

23. Hart D, Hillier MC and Shrimpton PC. Doses to patients from radiographic and fluoroscopic x-ray

imaging procedures in the UK (2010 review). HPA–CrCe–034. Chilton: HPA; 2012. 24. Berkhout Wer, Sanderink GCH and Van der Stelt PF. Does digital radiography increase the number

of intraoral radiographs? A questionnaire study of Dutch dental practices. Dentomaxillofac radiol

2003;32:124–127.

25. Bhaskaran V, Qualtrough AJe, rushton Ve, Worthington HV, Horner K. A laboratory comparison

of three imaging systems for image quality and radiation exposure characteristics. Int endod J

2005;38:645–652.

26. Berkhout Wer, Beuger DA, Sanderink GCH and Van der Stelt PF. the dynamic range of digital

radiographic systems: dose reduction or risk of overexposure? Dentomaxillofac radiol 2004;33:1–5. 27. Gulson AD, Knapp tA, ramsden PG. Doses to patients arising from dental x-ray examinations in the

UK, 2002–2004. A review of dental x-ray protection service data. HPA–rPD–022. Chilton: HPA; 2007. 28. rigolone M, Pasqualini D, Bianchi L, Berutti e, Bianchi SD. Vestibular surgical access to the palatine

root of the superior first molar: “low-dose cone-beam” Ct analysis of the pathway and its anatomic

variations. J endod 2003;29:773–5.

29. Walker L, enciso r, Mah J. three-dimensional localization of maxillary canines with cone-beam

computed tomography. Am J orthod Dentofacial orthop 2005;128:418–23. 30. Guerrero Me, Jacobs r, Loubele M, Schutyser F, Suetens P, van Steenberghe D. State-of-the-art

on cone beam Ct imaging for preoperative planning of implant placement. Clin oral Investig

2006;10:1–7.

31. [r] SenDenteXCt. radiation Protection 172. Cone beam Ct for dental and maxillofacial radiology:

evidence based guidelines. Luxembourg: european Commission; 2012. Available at: http://

ec.europa.eu/energy/nuclear/radiation_protection/doc/publication/172.pdf. Accessed: July, 2012. 32. Looe HK, eenboom F, Chofor n, Pfaffenberger A, Steinhoff M, rühmann A, Poplawski A, Willborn K,

Poppe B. Conversion coefficients for the estimation of effective doses in intraoral and panoramic

dental radiology from dose-area product values. radiat Prot Dosimetry 2008;131:365–73. 33. Palomo JM, rao PS, Hans MG. Influence of CBCt exposure conditions on radiation dose. oral Surg

oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod 2008;105:773–82.

34. ohman A, Kull L, Andersson J, Flygare L. radiation doses in examination of lower third molars with

computed tomography and conventional radiography. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2008;37:445–52. 35. okano t, Harata Y, Sugihara Y, Sakaino r, tsuchida r, Iwai K, et al. Absorbed and effective doses

from cone beam volumetric imaging for implant planning. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2009;38:79–85. 36. Lecomber Ar, Yoneyama Y, Lovelock DJ, Hosoi t, Adams AM. Comparison of patient dose from

imaging protocols for dental implant planning using conventional radiography and computed

tomography. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2001;30:255–9.

37. Ludlow JB, Davies-Ludlow Le, Brooks SL. Dosimetry of two extraoral direct digital imaging

devices: newtom cone beam Ct and orthophos Plus DS panoramic unit. Dentomaxillofac radiol

2003;32:229–34.



28 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

38. Lecomber Ar, Downes SL, Mokhtari M, Faulkner K. optimisation of patient doses in programmable



dental panoramic radiography. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2000;29:107–12. 39. Gijbels F, Jacobs r, Bogaerts r, Debaveye D, Verlinden S, Sanderink G. Dosimetry of digital

panoramic imaging. Part I: Patient exposure. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2005;34:145–9. 40. Gavala S, Donta C, tsiklakis K, Boziari A, Kamenopoulou V, Stamatakis HC. radiation dose

reduction in direct digital panoramic radiography. eur J radiol 2009;71:42–8. 41. Silva MA, Wolf U, Heinicke F, Gründler K, Visser H, Hirsch e. effective dosages for recording

Veraviewepocs dental panoramic images: analog film, digital, and panoramic scout for CBCt. oral

Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod 2008;106:571–7.

42. Grünheid t, Kolbeck Schieck Jr, Pliska Bt, Ahmad M, Larson Be. Dosimetry of a cone-beam

computed tomography machine compared with a digital x-ray machine in orthodontic imaging.

Am J orthod Dentofacial orthop 2012;141:436–43.

43. Looe HK, eenboom F, Chofor n, Pfaffenberger A, Sering M, rühmann A, Poplawski A, Willborn

K, Poppe B. Dose-area product measurements and determination of conversion coefficients for

the estimation of effective dose in dental lateral cephalometric radiology. radiat Prot Dosimetry

2007;124:181–6.

44. Gijbels F, Sanderink G, Wyatt J, Van Dam J, nowak B, Jacobs r. radiation doses of indirect and

direct digital cephalometric radiography. Br Dent J 2004;197:149–52. 45. Gijbels F, Sanderink G, Wyatt J, Van Dam J, nowak B, Jacobs r. radiation doses of collimated vs

non-collimated cephalometric exposures. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2003;32:128–33. 46. Lee B, Shin G, Kang S, Shin B, Back I, Park H, et al. Dose evaluation of selective collimation effect in

cephalography by measurement and Monte Carlo simulation. radiat Prot Dosimetry 2012;148:58–64. 47. Loubele M, Bogaerts r, Van Dijck e, Pauwels r, Vanheusden S, Suetens P, et al. Comparison

between effective radiation dose of CBCt and MSCt scanners for dentomaxillofacial applications.

eur J radiol 2009;71:461–8.

48. Hirsch e, Wolf U, Heinicke F, Silva MA. Dosimetry of the cone beam computed tomography

Veraviewepocs 3D compared with the 3D Accuitomo in different fields of view. Dentomaxillofac

radiol 2008;37:268–73.

49. Lofthag-Hansen S, thilander-Klang A, ekestubbe A, Helmrot e, Grondahl K. Calculating effective

dose on a cone beam computed tomography device: 3D Accuitomo and 3D Accuitomo FPD.

Dentomaxillofac radiol 2008;37:72–9.

50. Suomalainen A, Kiljunen t, Käser Y, Peltola J, Kortesniemi M. Dosimetry and image quality of

four dental cone beam computed tomography scanners compared with multislice computed

tomography scanners. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2009;38:367–78.

51. Pauwels r, Beinsberger J, Collaert B, theodorakou C, rogers J, Walker A, et al. effective dose range

for dental cone beam computed tomography scanners. eur J radiol 2012;81:267–71. 52. theodorakou C, Walker A, Horner K, Pauwels r, Bogaerts r, Jacobs r. estimation of paediatric

organ and effective doses from dental cone beam Ct using anthropomorphic phantoms. Br J radiol

2012;85:153–60.

53. Qu XM, Li G, Ludlow JB, Zhang ZY, Ma XC. effective radiation dose of ProMax 3D cone-beam

computerized tomography scanner with different dental protocols. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol

oral radiol endod 2010;110:770–6.

54. Ludlow JB, Ivanovic M. Comparative dosimetry of dental CBCt devices and 64-slice Ct for oral and

maxillofacial radiology. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod 2008;106:106–14.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 29

55. Davies J, Johnson B, Drage n. effective doses from cone beam Ct investigation of the jaws.



Dentomaxillofac radiol 2012;41:30–6.

56. Jadu F, Yaffe MJ, Lam eW. A comparative study of the effective radiation doses from cone

beam computed tomography and plain radiography for sialography. Dentomaxillofac radiol

2010;39:257–63.

57. Librizzi Zt, tadinada AS, Valiyaparambil JV, Lurie AG, Mallya SM. Cone-beam computed tomography

to detect erosions of the temporomandibular joint: effect of field of view and voxel size on

diagnostic efficacy and effective dose. Am J orthod Dentofacial orthop 2011;140:e25–30. 58. tsiklakis K, Donta C, Gavala S, Karayianni K, Kamenopoulou V, Hourdakis CJ.Dose reduction in

maxillofacial imaging using low dose cone beam Ct. eur J radiol 2005;56:413–7. 59. Silva MA, Wolf U, Heinicke F, Bumann A, Visser H, Hirsch e. Cone-beam computed tomography for

routine orthodontic treatment planning: a radiation dose evaluation. Am J orthod Dentofacial

orthop 2008;133:640.e1–5.

60. Health Protection Agency Working Party on dental cone beam Ct equipment. Guidance on the

safe use of dental cone beam Ct (computed tomography) equipment. HPA–CrCe–010. Chilton:

HPA;2010.

61. Qu X, Li G, Zhang Z, Ma X. thyroid shields for radiation dose reduction during cone beam

computed tomography scanning for different oral and maxillofacial regions. eur J radiol

2012;81:376–80.

62. rustemeyer P, Streubühr U, Suttmoeller J. Low-dose dental computed tomography: significant dose

reduction without loss of image quality. Acta radiol 2004;45:847–53. 63. Fanucci e, Leporace M, Di Costanzo G, Fiaschetti V, Simonetti G. Multidetector Ct and dentascan

software: dosimetric evaluation and technique improvement. radiol Med 2006;111:130–8. 64. Cohnen M, Kemper J, Möbes o, Pawelzik J, Mödder U. radiation dose in dental radiology. eur

radiol 2002;12:634–7.

65. Wall B, Haylock r, Jansen J, Hillier M, Hart D, Shrimpton P. radiation risks from medical x-ray

examinations as a function of the age and sex of the patient. HPA–CrCe–028. Chilton: HPA; 2011. 66. Protection of pregnant patients during medical exposures to ionising radiation advice from the Health

Protection Agency. royal College of radiologists and College of radiographers. Chilton: HPA; 2009. 67. Holroyd Jr, Gulson AD. the radiation protection implications of the use of cone beam computed

tomography in dentistry – what you need to know. Chilton: HPA; 2009. 68. Martin CJ. effective dose: how should it be applied to medical exposure. Brit J radiol 2007;80:639–

647.

69. napier ID. reference doses for dental radiography. Br Dent J 1999;186:392–6. 70. Hart D, Hillier MC, Wall BF. national reference doses for common radiographic, fluoroscopic and

dental x-ray examinations in the UK. Br J radiol 2009;82:1–12.

71. Department of Health. the Ionising radiations regulations 2017. London, DH; 2017. 72. Department of Health. the Ionising radiation (Medical exposure) regulations 2017. London:

Department of Health; 2017.

73. Holroyd Jr. national reference doses for dental cephalometric radiography. Br J radiol

2011;84:1121-24.

74. Holroyd Jr, Walker A. recommendations for the design of x-ray facilities and the quality assurance

of dental cone beam Ct systems. A report of the HPA working party on dental cone beam Ct. HPA–

rPD–065. Chilton: HPA; 2011.



30 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

75. Watson SJ, Jones AL, oatway WB, Hughes JS. Ionising radiation exposure of the UK population: 2005



review. HPA–rPD–001. Chilton: HPA; 2005.

76. Liu H, Zhuo W, Chen B, Yi Y, Li D. Patient doses in different projections of conventional diagnostic

x-ray examinations. radiat Prot Dosimetry 2008;132:334–8.

77. Hirofuji Y, Aoyama t, Koyama S, Kawaura C, Fujii K. evaluation of patient dose for barium enemas

and Ct colonography in Japan. Br J radiol 2009; 82:219–27.

78. Mori S, nishizawa K, Kondo C, ohno M, Akahane K, endo M. effective doses in subjects undergoing

computed tomography cardiac imaging with the 256-multislice Ct scanner. eur J radiol

2008;65:442–8.

79. office for national Statistics. Births and deaths in england and Wales, 2009. newport: office for

national Statistics; 2010. Available via: www.ons.gov.uk. Accessed: July 2012. 80. Berrington de González A, Darby S. risk of cancer from diagnostic x-rays: estimates for the UK and

14 other countries. Lancet 2004;363:345–51.

81. Hart D, Wall BF. UK population dose from medical x-ray examinations. eur J radiol 2004;50:285–91. 82. Davies C, Grange S and trevor MM. radiation protection practices and related continuing

professional education in dental radiography. radiography 2005;11: 255–61. 83. tugnait A, Clerehugh V and Hirschmann Pn. radiographic equipment and techniques used in

general dental practice. A survey of general dental practitioners in england and Wales. J Dent

2003;31:197–203.

84. rushton Ve, Horner K, Worthington HM. the quality of panoramic radiographs in general dental

practice. Br Dent J 1999;186:630–633.

85. Helminen Se, Vehkalahti M, Wolf J and Murtomaa H. Quality evaluation of young adults’

radiographs in Finnish public oral health service. J Dent 2000;28:549–55. 86. [r] rushton Ve, Horner K. the use of panoramic radiology in dental practice. J Dent 1996;24:185–201. 87. taylor-Weetmann K, Wake B and Hyde C. Comparison of panoramic and bitewing radiography for

the detection of dental caries: a systematic review of diagnostic tests. Database of Abstracts and

reviews of effects (DAre); 2002. Available at: http://rep.bham.ac.uk/pdfs/2002/dental_caries.pdf.

Accessed: 2012.

88. Kim t-S, obst C, Zehaczek S and Geenen C. Detection of bone loss with different x-ray techniques in

periodontal patients. J Periodontol 2008;79:1141–9.

89. Pepelassi eA, tsiklakis K and Diamanti-Kipioti A. radiographic detection and assessment of the

periodontal endosseous defects. J Clin Periodontol 2000;27:224–30. 90. rushton Ve, Horner K, Worthington HV. Screening panoramic radiology of adults in general dental

practice: radiological findings. Br Dent J 2001;190:495–501.

91. Brooks SL, Cho SY. Validation of a specific criterion for dental radiography. oral Surg oral Med oral

Pathol 1993;75:383–6.

92. rushton Ve, Horner K, Worthington HV. Screening panoramic radiography of new adult patients

in general dental practice: diagnostic yield when combined with bitewing radiography and

identification of selection criteria. Br Dent J 2002;192:275–9.

93. rushton Ve, Horner K, Worthington HV. routine panoramic radiography of new adult patients

in general dental practice: relevance of diagnostic yield to treatment and identification of

radiographic selection criteria. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod 2002;93:488–95. 94. Bohay rn, Stephens rG, Kogon SL. A study of the impact of screening or selective radiography on

the treatment and post delivery outcome for edentulous patients. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 31

oral radiol endod 1998;86:353–359.

95. Atchinson KA. radiographic examinations of orthodontic educators and practitioners. J Dent educ

1986;50:651–655.

96. Bruks A, enberg K, nordqvist I, Hansson AS, Jansson L, Svenson B. radiographic examinations as an

aid to orthodontic diagnosis and treatment planning. Swed Dent J 1999;23:77–85. 97. Han UK, Vig KWL, Weintraud JA, Vig PS, Kowalski CJ. Consistency of orthodontic treatment decisions

relative to diagnostic records. Am J orthop Dentofac orthop 1991;100:212–219. 98. Atchinson KA, Luke LS, White SC. Contribution of pretreatment radiographs to orthodontists’

decision making. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol 1991;71:238–245. 99. Atchinson KA, Luke LS, White SC. An algorithm for ordering pretreatment orthodontic radiographs.

Am J orthod Dentofac orthop 1992;102:29–44.

100. Hintze H, Wenzel A, Williams S. Diagnostic value of clinical examination for the identification of

children in need of orthodontic treatment compared with clinical examination and screening

pantomography. eur J orth. 1990;12:385–388.

101. British orthodontic Society. Isaacson KG, thom Ar, Atack ne, Horner K and Whaites e, editors, 4th

ed. Guidelines for the use of radiographs in clinical orthodontics. London: British orthodontic

Society; 2015.

102. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines network. Management of unerupted and impacted third molar

teeth. edinburgh: SIGn; 1999.

103. Lund tM and Manson-Hing Lr. relations between tooth positions and focal troughs of panoramic

machines. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol 1975;39:318–28.

104. Scarfe WC and Farman AG. Characteristics of the orthopantomograph oP 100. Dentomaxillofac

radiol 1998;27:51–7.

105. Flygare L and Öhman A. Preoperative imaging procedures for lower wisdom teeth removal. Clin

oral Invest 2008;12:291–302.

106. Guss DA, Clark rF, Peitz t, taub M. Pantomography vs mandibular series for the detection of

mandibular fractures. Acad emerg Med 2000;7:141–145.

107. nair MK, nair UP. Imaging of mandibular trauma: roC analysis. Acad emerg Med 2001;8:689–695. 108. Markowitz BL, Sinow JD, Kawamoto HK Jr., Shewmake K, Khoumehr F. Prospective comparison

of axial computed tomography and standard and panoramic radiographs in the diagnosis of

mandibular fractures. Ann Plast Surg 1999;42:163–169.

109. Wilson IF, Lokeh A, Benjamin CI, Hilger PA, Hamler DD, ondrey FG et al. Contribution of

conventional axial computed tomography (nonhelical), in conjunction with panoramic tomography

(zonography), in evaluating mandibular fractures. Ann Plastic Surg 2000;45:415–421. 110. Schimming r, eckelt U, Kittner t. the value of computer tomograms in fractures of the mandibular

condylar process. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod. 1999;87:632–639. 111. epstein JB, Caldwell J, Black G. the utility of panoramic imaging of the temporomandibular joint

in patients with temporomandibular disorders. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod

2001;92:236–239.

112. Mcneill C, Mohl nD, rugh JD, tanaka tt. temporomandibular disorders: diagnosis, management,

education, and research. J Am Dent Assoc 1990;120:253–263.

113. Brooks SL, Brand JW, Gibbs SJ, Hollender L, Lurie AG, omnell K-A et al. Imaging of the

temporomandibular joint. A position paper of the American Academy of oral and Maxillofacial

radiology. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod 1997;83:609–618.



32 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

3 R A D i o G R A P H S i n t H E M A n A G E M E n t o F t H E D E v E L o P i n G D E n t i t i o n



3.1 intRoDUCtion

Allan Thom and Keith Isaacson



this section has been divided into early and late mixed dentition stages. Each section

considers common clinical problems that may require radiographic examination.

the section does not aim to present a comprehensive consideration of radiographic

selection criteria for the specialist orthodontist, for whom a well-referenced and

detailed document is available.1 thus, references in this section are restricted to

existing guidelines.



the need to expose children to dental radiographs must be carefully considered

as they are particularly susceptible to the effects of ionising radiation (see Section

2). there must be a sound clinical indication to justify exposure. there are, however,

many developmental abnormalities where interceptive treatment may prevent or

ameliorate later problems.



A careful clinical examination should indicate the most appropriate radiograph

required to confirm the diagnosis. Wherever possible, previous radiographs (such as

bitewings) should be examined to ensure that sufficient information is not already

available. it should be remembered that an intraoral radiograph gives the lowest

dose and should be used whenever practicable. As a result of findings from an

intraoral radiograph, a panoramic radiograph may subsequently be necessary. For

general dental practitioners, the decision to undertake a comprehensive radiographic

examination may best be referred to a specialist orthodontist.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 33 Cone beam computed tomography (CBCt) is becoming increasingly available to provide

a three-dimensional image. However, its use in the developing dentition should

adhere strictly to appropriate selection criteria, such as those developed using a formal

methodology on a European basis.2 only in a very small number of cases will CBCt

be required subsequent to abnormal findings identified in a conventional image. the

decision to undertake CBCt would best be made by a specialist orthodontist.



3.2 EARLy MixED DEntition

3.2.1 Upper labial segment

CEntRAL inCiSoRS (Figure 3.1)

Frequently, an upper central incisor may erupt in cross bite with the lower incisors.

this should be corrected orthodontically and can often be treated without the need

for radiographs.



Failure of eruption of one or both central incisors, or retention of the deciduous

incisors beyond the normal age range, requires investigation. the common causes of

failure of eruption are a history of trauma or the presence of supernumerary teeth.



Figure 3.1: Upper central incisors



34 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) An intraoral radiograph will assist in making a diagnosis.



Gross rotation of one or both central incisors or an excessively large median diastema

may also suggest an unerupted supernumerary.



LAtERAL inCiSoRS (Figure 3.2)

Abnormalities in the lateral incisor region are frequently encountered. the most

common abnormaility is failed eruption or peg-shaped morphology. Failed eruption

may be due to developmental absence of the lateral incisor. An intraoral radiograph

is indicated in this instance. if the lateral incisor is missing, it is wise to determine

if other successional teeth are developmentally absent, so a panoramic radiograph

would be appropriate. A peg-shaped lateral incisor or one of abnormal morphology

may be associated with an unerupted, misplaced canine and in this case, following

palpation, if the patient’s dental development age is clinically assessed to be over

nine years, an intraoral radiograph may be indicated. For each of these findings,

appropriate interceptive action may be required.



Figure 3.2: Upper lateral incisors



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 35 3.2.2 Lower labial segment (Figure 3.3)

Minor irregularities of alignment following eruption of the lower incisors are a

common cause of parental concern and do not require radiographic investigation.

However, significant delay in eruption of one or more of the lower incisors associated

with retained deciduous predecessors will require radiographic investigation.



Figure 3.3: Lower labial segment



C When investigating developmental disturbances of teeth in the early mixed dentition stage, intraoral radiography should be considered.



36 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 3.2.3 Posterior segments

CRoSS BitES

Unilateral posterior cross bites in the early mixed dentition associated with a

displacing activity may be corrected with simple orthodontic appliances. in the

absence of any other adverse clinical indicators, this can normally be accomplished

without the need for radiographs.



FiRSt PERMAnEnt MoLARS (Figure 3.4)

When there is a doubtful prognosis for one or more permanent first molars, in a

patient with a high caries incidence, it is wise to consider the possible loss of all

four first molars to enable balanced development of the occlusion. A panoramic

radiograph is required to determine the presence of successional teeth, particularly

the second premolars. the findings may indicate the need for a specialist orthodontic

opinion to plan the treatment appropriately.



Figure 3.4: First permanent molars (poor prognosis)



impaction of an upper first molar into the second deciduous molar necessitates an

intraoral image to determine the presence of the second premolar, the absence of

which may suggest the possibility of other developmentally missing teeth. Should this

prove to be the case, a panoramic radiograph may be necessary.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 37

C When one or more first permanent molars have a doubtful prognosis, a panoramic radiograph may be justified to allow assessment of the other first molars and determine the presence of successional teeth.



3.3 LAtE MixED DEntition

3.3.1 Labial segments

Any clinical abnormalities not identified in the early mixed dentition must be

investigated. it is likely that radiographic investigation will be necessary. Figures 3.1

to 3.3 remain relevant in the late mixed dentition.



3.3.2 Canines (Figure 3.5)

An essential part of the clinical examination in the late mixed dentition is palpation

of the buccal sulcus to confirm the presence and position of the unerupted maxillary

canines. if the patient is 11 years old or over and the canines cannot be palpated,

either buccally or palatally, an intraoral radiograph would be appropriate as early

diagnosis of a misplaced canine is of utmost importance to outcome.



B in the late mixed dentition, radiography is indicated when permanent canines cannot be palpated.



A peg-shaped lateral incisor or unilateral delayed loss of a deciduous canine may also

require an intraoral radiograph in view of the association of these clinical findings

with a misplaced canine.



Where there is doubt as to the viability of a lateral incisor, possibly due to resorption by

a misplaced canine, identified by conventional radiography, CBCt may be indicated.2



38 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

Figure 3.5: Unerupted upper canines





the use of CBCt is not indicated as a routine but only after careful examination of

the existing radiographic images. Wherever possible, a limited field-of-view CBCt

examination should be used as this results in a lower radiation dose.



Although misplaced maxillary canines are a commonly encountered problem, the

possibility of displaced lower canines should not be overlooked. if their eruption is

delayed, then radiographic investigation may be required.



C For the assessment of an impacted tooth and possible resorption of an adjacent tooth, CBCt may be used when the information cannot be obtained adequately by lower-dose conventional radiography.



3.3.3 Deciduous molars (Figure 3.6)

Delayed loss of second deciduous molars can be an indication of developmentally

absent second premolars. Examination of existing bitewing images may be adequate



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 39 to determine the presence of the second premolars. if the second deciduous molars

are retained when other successional teeth have erupted, an appropriate field–

limited panoramic radiograph can be used. However, when a single second deciduous

molar is retained, an intraoral image may suffice. Submerging deciduous molars

should be observed clinically at regular intervals. noticeable deterioration between

regular examinations may require intraoral radiography.



Figure 3.6: Retained deciduous molars



3.3.4 Permanent molars (Figure 3.4)

A grossly carious first molar will usually require a field-limited panoramic

radiograph to assess the condition and prognosis of the other first molars and

to confirm the presence of permanent successional teeth. An orthodontic opinion

may be indicated where the loss of one or more first molars is necessary.



40 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 3.4 oRtHoDontiC tREAtMEnt

the indications for diagnostic radiographs are fully covered in the British

orthodontic Society guidelines.1



For the GDP, if a routine dental examination indicates that an orthodontic

opinion may be appropriate, then choice of radiographs should normally be

left to the specialist. if a specialist orthodontic opinion is necessary as a result

of a radiographic finding, it is essential that any available radiographic images

accompany the referral letter.



the flow charts in this section are for general guidance only. every

patient must be assessed on their merits.



3.5 REFEREnCES

1. British orthodontic Society. Isaacson KG, thom Ar, Atack ne, Horner K and Whaites e, editors,

4th ed. Guidelines for the use of radiographs in clinical orthodontics. London: British orthodontic

Society; 2015.

2. european Commission. radiation Protection 172. Cone beam Ct for dental and maxillofacial

radiology: evidence based guidelines. Luxembourg: european Commission; 2012. Available at:

https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/172.pdf. Accessed: January 2018.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 41

42 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



4 R A D i o G R A P H S i n D E n t A L C A R i E S D i A G n o S i S



4.1 intRoDUCtion

Nigel Pitts and David Ricketts



Most of the available research on radiographic diagnosis of dental caries concerns

children. this may be because of the greater risks of ionising radiation in children

and the historically high prevalence of caries in younger individuals, combined

with a greater focus on prevention. Current thinking recognises the importance

of early caries detection and preventive caries management in adults as well. in

recent years there has also been an increasing emphasis on caries risk assessment,

changes in caries risk and assessing the activity of individual lesions in patients of all

ages. Children have been selected as a principal focus within this section due to the

relative volume of evidence for the younger age groups. the methodology used to

derive the recommendations that follow can be examined in Section 1.



When assessing caries risk, clinicians should note that in 2003–2004 the Guideline

Development Group and the national institute for Health and Clinical Excellence

Collaborating Centre reviewed the evidence on caries risk in relation to recall

frequency, leading to the issue in 2004 of Dental Recall: Recall Interval Between

Routine Dental Examinations.1 Readers should refer to this guidance for a checklist

for assessing caries risk in relation to recall frequency. More recent consideration of

personalised recall frequency and the use of bitewing radiography in lower caries risk

groups can also be found by Clarkson et al (2009)2 and Mejàre and Kidd (2008).3



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 43 4.2 CHiLDREn

Posterior bitewing radiographs are an essential adjunct to clinical examination5R–8R

(one review6R has been classified independently by the Scottish intercollegiate

Guidelines network as a meta-analysis) and should be considered even for pre-school

children.3,4 it has also become apparent that not only is the bitewing radiograph

necessary for approximal caries detection, but that it can also offer a significant yield

in the detection of occlusal caries.7R–9R



the magnitude of the increased diagnostic yield from the use of radiography on

occlusal surfaces is related to the method of clinical visual assessment employed.

Meticulous visual assessment of clean dry teeth with criteria such as iCDAS10–11 can

disclose many lesions which would be otherwise missed. the periodic bitewing

examination can contribute to an individual’s care plan for preventive and operative

dental care.12 information about lesion behaviour over time (progression, arrest,

regression) can be added to the caries status assessment made at the first visit and

can contribute to an appraisal of the patient’s response to preventive therapy.



Although there is a need to ensure that radiographic exposures are kept as low

as reasonably practicable, this concern must be carefully balanced against the

ethical difficulties of failing to employ a diagnostic aid that has been shown

to detect clinically important numbers of lesions that would otherwise remain

hidden. Even when approximal contacts are open, bitewing radiographs

have a role in identifying occlusal lesions. the importance of a high-quality,

standardised technique, using image receptor-holding and beam-aiming devices

and ensuring proper processing, cannot be over-emphasised. increased use of

digital radiography overcomes some of the errors previously associated with the

processing of conventional radiographic films.



A patient should only be exposed to ionising radiation after a thorough clinical

examination. this should include an assessment of caries risk as high, medium or low.

Appendix 2 lists some of the many factors that a practitioner will consider in making a

caries risk assessment. the importance of the individual factors will vary from patient

to patient and it must be remembered that risk status may change over time.



44 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) this assessment of risk is central to deciding when to take subsequent

radiographs.5R,8R,13R–15R this time interval will vary widely but it should be

specific to each patient. Although reliable risk assessment can be problematic,

clinicians are particularly good at identifying high-risk individuals.



B in the diagnosis of caries in children, the weight of expert opinion supports the statement that caries should be diagnosed as early as possible to allow management before cavitation and pulpal involvement, and to identify caries-active patients and 4 those at increased risk of caries in the future.



C the taking of ‘routine’ radiographs based solely on time elapsed 15R,16 since the last examination is not supportable. intervals between subsequent radiographic examinations must be reassessed for each new period as individuals can move in and out of caries risk categories over time.



4.2.1 Caries risk assessment

the evidence around caries risk assessment is complex, and a number of systematic

reviews have been summarised by twetman and Fontana (2009).17 there are multiple

risk factors and indicators which carry a range of weightings. the strength of evidence

varies between children and adults. For all ages, by far the most important factor is

past caries experience. While the evidence supporting the use of other individual risk

factors may not be strong at a group level, there is still value at the individual patent

level to aid in the development of an individualised and targeted preventive and

disease management plan.18,19



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 45 4.2.2 High caries risk

Expert opinion supports taking bitewing radiographs at the initial examination for

all children designated as being at high caries risk.13R,15R in addition, there is a body

of evidence to support this view.17,21,22R,23–26



there is a significant diagnostic yield associated with taking bitewing radiographs

for use in conjunction with clinical examination for both approximal and occlusal

caries detection, even in the absence of clinically detectable decay.20,24,27,28



the degree of benefit is variously reported as being between 167% and 800%

of the yield from clinical diagnosis, with or without fibreoptic transillumination

assistance. in adults with a history of high caries risk and previous restorative care

of varying complexity, bitewing radiographs are felt to have increased importance

in detecting defective/overhanging restoration margins and caries adjacent to

restorations on obscured tooth surfaces.29



in terms of the contribution that radiographs might make to individual patient

care plans, current evidence suggests that:

• if a small lesion is detected which radiographically appears to be less than

halfway through approximal enamel, the lesion’s location should be recorded

and periodic review arranged. Preventive treatment should be instigated.

• if an approximal lesion extending to the inner half of enamel is detected,

or if an outer-half lesion is seen to progress, preventive therapy should be

instigated and the results of such therapy should be periodically monitored.13R

• in a high caries risk individual, approximal lesions extending into dentine,

detected radiographically, have a great likelihood of exhibiting cavitation.23,30–32

• Additionally, it has been demonstrated that radiographic evidence of occlusal

dentine demineralisation is significantly associated with heavily infected

dentine;33 therefore, the bitewing radiograph should contribute to operative

care plans for individuals with radiographic occlusal dentinal lesions.



46 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

B it is recommended that all children at high caries risk have six-monthly posterior bitewing radiographs taken until no new or active lesions are apparent and the individual has entered another risk category.* * Bitewings should not be taken more frequently and it is imperative to reassess

caries risk in order to justify using this interval again.



it has been shown that in individuals with high caries risk, lesions can still take up

to three or four years to penetrate approximal enamel in permanent teeth.34R the

time taken for caries to progress from the enamel-dentine junction to the pulp

is unknown.35R Many authors consequently recommend six-monthly radiographs for

all high caries risk individuals until no new or active lesions are apparent. Again,

radiographs should not be taken more frequently, and it is imperative to reassess an

individual’s caries risk in order to justify using this interval again.



4.2.3 Moderate caries risk

the evidence also supports the diagnostic use of bitewing radiographs for

children with a moderate caries risk. Many authors report significant addition to the

diagnostic yield from the use of bitewing radiographs, varying from 150% to 270%

of the yield from clinical examination alone.36–43 this increased yield relates to both

approximal and occlusal caries.



of the 12 studies in this area which passed critical review, no significant diagnostic

yield was gained in three (in one study on four-year-old children,41 in one where

simulated clinical examination was supplemented by fibreoptic transillumination,38

and in one when permanent teeth were clinically examined meticulously).44



on balance, the evidence supports the taking of posterior bitewing radiographs

annually for children who are designated as being at moderate caries risk.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 47

B it is recommended that all children with a moderate risk of developing caries have annual posterior bitewing radiographs taken until no new or active lesions are apparent and the patient has entered another risk category.



4.2.4 Low caries risk

Compared to the evidence regarding children with high and moderate caries

risk, there is less evidence available to support the taking of posterior bitewing

radiographs in children designated to be at low risk of developing caries. this may

be due in part to the sample selection that many researchers have available to

them, resulting in few studies in this area. the balance of the available evidence on

the need to take bitewings is unclear. Although the diagnostic yield from posterior

bitewing radiographs is comparatively lower than the yield from higher-risk

groups,45 high-quality studies still show a significant yield. in one study, radiographs

revealed two to three times more carious lesions than clinical examination alone.45



the evidence reviewed suggests that:

• Even in low caries regions, selective radiography should be conducted on

surfaces that are clinically suspected to be carious.46 there is continuing concern

that hidden dentinal caries may affect significant numbers of low caries risk

individuals,3,47R although there is a lack of high-quality studies on the prevalence

of hidden dentinal caries in low caries risk populations.

• in the primary dentition, detection of three or more discoloured enamel lesions

or dentinal lesions has been claimed to be a good predictor of the presence of

additional dentinal lesions on radiograph, which could not be detected by visual

examination.48

• in low caries risk groups, the time taken for approximal enamel lesions to progress

through to dentine in permanent teeth is now in excess of six to eight years on

average, and clinical decisions to restore must reflect this slow progression.47R



48 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

• there are particular problems associated with assessing sealed occlusal surfaces

in children with low caries risk; bitewing radiographs can provide a significant

diagnostic yield, if used appropriately.49



in the low caries risk category, it is therefore important for individual clinicians to

apply risk-benefit calculations to each of their patients in order to make appropriate

decisions.



A child patient with little or no caries activity does not require bitewing radiographs

at every recall appointment;14R however, it is important to reconsider the child’s

caries risk status.



B the weight of expert opinion supports the view that children with low caries risk should be radiographed at approximately 12 to 18-month intervals in the primary dentition and at approximately two-year intervals in the permanent dentition. More extended radiographic recall intervals may be appropriate

if there is specific evidence of continuing low caries risk.15R,35R



4.3 ADULtS

there is comparatively little evidence evaluating the present diagnostic yield of

radiographs for caries in adults. it must be appreciated, however, that the carious

process and caries activity are dependent upon interactions on a susceptible tooth

surface of bacterial plaque with appropriate sugary substances, and that these

factors far outweigh a patient’s chronological age. in the absence of experimental

data from older age groups, it is reasonable, therefore, to extrapolate from the

information available from studies of children and young adults.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 49 there are particular reasons to be cautious in assessment of caries and caries

risk in adults. As a consequence of the genuine overall reduction of caries

prevalence across the UK population, when caries is present it often progresses

very slowly and can present very late; thus cavitation into dentine may be visible

for the first time in young adults who appear to be caries-free. Similarly, caries

risk assessments of adults must consider rapid behaviour and lifestyle changes

that can have a significant dental impact. Changes in caries risk may follow the

patient becoming less dextrous in plaque removal, a reduction in saliva following

the use of some medications or the onset of Sjögren’s syndrome, and/or dietary

changes following events such as retirement, bereavement or a change in social

environment. thus, while interpretation of the clinical examination and social

history must be tailored to the age of the patient and the circumstances indicating

the need for the clinical examination, the diagnostic benefits and limitations of

dental radiography for adults are essentially comparable with those for children.



overall, root caries is a growing problem for only a minority of adults, but an

increasing proportion of this population are elderly patients. one specific clinical

issue concerns root caries related to impacted third molar teeth and distal surface

caries in second molar teeth. there is comparatively little evidence regarding

radiographic selection criteria in relation to root caries. Care should always be

taken to differentiate radiographic signs of root caries from artefacts such as

cervical burnout.



For these reasons, while suggesting that high-quality studies with adults are

needed, the same recommendations as made for children are made for adults.



50 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 4.3.1 High caries risk



C it is recommended that all adults designated as having high caries risk have six-monthly posterior bitewing radiographs taken until no new or active lesions are apparent and the individual has entered another risk category.* *Bitewings should not be taken more frequently and it is imperative to reassess caries

risk in order to justify using this interval again. it is also important to remember that the rate of caries progression in enamel and dentine will differ and that progression rates in adults may well be slower than in children.



4.3.2 Moderate caries risk



C it is recommended that all adults designated as having moderate caries risk have annual posterior bitewing radiographs taken until no new or active lesions are apparent and the individual has entered another risk category.



4.3.3 Low caries risk



C it is recommended that adults designated as having low caries risk have posterior bitewing radiographs taken approximately every two years. More extended radiographic recall intervals may be employed if there is explicit evidence of continuing low caries risk.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 51 4.4 DiGitAL DEntAL RADioGRAPHy

over the last decade, digital radiography has seen increasing use in general practice

and is set to become the default system for new installations. its benefits range from

the potential to reduce x-ray exposures (although faster film has to an extent reduced

this benefit), eliminate conventional processing faults, allows the manipulation of

images (contrast enhancement) and facilitate sharing and transfer of information,

enabling the efficient storage of images. the comparative diagnostic yield with

conventional film radiography has been shown to be broadly equivalent.50



Digital x-ray equipment can now be regarded as standard for contemporary

dental practice.



4.5 nEWER RADioGRAPHiC MEtHoDS AnD ALtERnAtivES

to RADioGRAPHS FoR CARiES DiAGnoSiS

there is a considerable body of evidence relating to both children and adults

looking at new methods as adjuncts and alternatives to radiographic caries

diagnosis;51R however, this area is complex as the differing methodologies used

often confound direct comparisons.8R,47R,52-54



4.5.1 Cone beam computed tomography (CBCT)

While three-dimensional imaging is of clinical significance in many fields, its use in

caries diagnosis is not currently supported in a European guideline document.55R

in practice, CBCt gives the advantage of three dimensions at the expense of a loss

of resolution, when compared with intraoral radiography. there are significant

problems with CBCt related to artefacts, principally from metallic restorations

in the path of the x-ray beam. these artefacts introduce dark streaks that pass

through the crowns of other teeth, leading to artefactual radiolucencies which

can produce a caries-like appearance, or even mask real carious lesions.



52 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

B CBCT should not be used as a routine method of caries diagnosis.



4.5.2 Elective temporary tooth separation



Elective temporary tooth separation (using orthodontic

elastics between teeth) has been advocated as a method of

assessing directly the caries status of approximal surfaces.

The method currently requires an interval of one to seven

days before the approximal surfaces can be viewed.44,56-58



This method is particularly useful in determining whether or not cavitation has

taken place.31,58,59 In situations where confirmation of cavitation is difficult, use of

a light-bodied silicone impression material interdentally is of benefit in visualising

surface status. Separation has been used successfully in Scotland, England, Brazil,

Denmark and Sweden, and has been shown to be a viable tool in a general dental

practice setting.44 Current research is exploring the use of approximal sealants for

caries management and this technique also uses elective tooth separation.





Figure 4.1 Contact area of premolars showing Figure 4.2 Part of a bitewing radiograph



possible caries approximally. showing equivocal lesions approximally.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 53



Figure 4.3 Following temporary elective Figure 4.4 Silicone impression material can tooth separation, the presence or absence of be used to confirm cavitation or surface cavitation can be determined by direct visual discontinuity. examination.





C Consideration should be given to temporarily separating approximal surfaces where there is doubt whether or not cavitation has taken place and thus whether a filling is indicated.



4.5.3 Fibreoptic transillumination

For many years there has been debate in the literature about the potential diagnostic

use of fibreoptic transillumination (FOTI), either to replace or supplement bitewing

radiographs (Figures 4.5–7).40,60R The balance of evidence suggests that it is an

important adjunct which has considerable diagnostic value for detecting dentinal

lesions at approximal sites. Bitewing radiographs will detect more dentinal lesions

and many more ‘enamel’ lesions than FOTI (even though radiographs will still not

detect all approximal enamel lesions). Research results with FOTI are obtained using

custom-made 0.5 mm diameter tips in the hands of examiners trained in the use of

this somewhat technique-sensitive method.



54 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



Figure 4.5 Clinically suspicious Figure 4.6 FOTI reveals a Figure 4.7 Part of a bitewing mesial surface of upper 6. shadow within the mesial radiograph reveals a lesion





surface af the upper 6. in the mesial surface of the



upper 6.



C FOTI should be used as an adjunct to bitewing radiographs for caries diagnosis. When used, a 0.5 mm tip should be employed and training is recommended.



4.5.4 Electrical methods of caries diagnosis

Of the ‘new’ methods of caries diagnosis, there is a growing consensus that electrical

methods provide the most promising results and the greatest potential for helping

practitioners faced with the difficult task of diagnosing caries without using ionising

radiation.47R, 52, 61–63 Two basic systems have been developed, one based on fixed low-

frequency AC and a co-axial air supply,61 and one based on AC impedance spectroscopy.64

Research into the latter has led to the commercial introduction of a caries detection

device (CarieScan). This is an area where progress can be anticipated.



C The development, testing and implementation of electrical detection and monitoring aids should be followed closely.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 55 4.5.5 Laser fluorescence methods

Research into laser fluorescence has led to the development of commercially

available devices such as the DIAGNOdent and DIAGNOdent pen (KaVo, Biberach,

Germany) and VistaProof (Dürr, Bietigheim-Bissingen, Germany). The former detects

fluorescence from bacterial by-products, namely porphyrins. Research into the

DIAGNOdent has shown that specificity (false-positive decisions) is a particular

problem.65 Such decisions could lead to over-treatment and clinicians should be

aware of this potential problem.



C Care should be taken in the interpretation of results using some optical caries detection devices as false positives can pose a problem.



4.5.6 Quantitative laser fluorescence

Sound tooth tissue fluoresces under laser light of a specific wavelength, while the

intensity of fluorescence decreases in carious lesions. The intensity of fluorescence

can be quantified and is the basis for this detection technique, also referred to as

quatitative light-induced fluorescence (QLF), which is still in its research stage.



56 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 4.6 REFEREnCES

1. national Institute for Health and Clinical excellence. Dental recall: recall interval between

routine dental examinations. London: nICe; 2004. Available at: http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG19/

Guidance/pdf/english. Accessed: May 2004.

2. Clarkson Je, Amaechi Bt, ngo H. recall, reassessment and monitoring. In Pitts nB. Detection,

assessment, diagnosis and monitoring of caries. Basel: Karger; 2009. 3. Mejàre I. Kidd eAM. radiography for caries diagnosis. In Fejerskov o. Kidd e. Dental caries: the

disease and its clinical management. 2nd edition. Munksgaard: Blackwell; 2008. p69–88. 4. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines network. Prevention and management of dental decay in the pre-

school child. SIGn Guideline 83. edinburgh: SIGn; 2005. Available at: www.sign.ac.uk/pdf/sign83. 5. [r] Hanlon PM. radiographic considerations in pedodontics. J Pedodont 1985;9:285–301. 6. [r] Kidd eA. Pitts nB. A reappraisal of the value of the bitewing radiograph in the diagnosis of

posterior approximal caries. Br Dent J 1990:169:195–200.

7. [r] Weerheijm KL. occlusal ‘hidden caries’. Dent Update 1997;24:182–4. 8. [r] Pitts nB. the use of bitewing radiographs in the management of dental caries: scientific and

practical considerations. Dentomaxillofac radiol 1996;25:5–16.

9. [r] Henderson nJ. Crawford PJM. Guidelines for taking radiographs of children. Dent Update

1995;22: 158–61.

10. ICDAS Foundation. International Caries Detection and Assessment System. Available at: www.ICDAS.org. 11. Pitts nB, ekstrand Kr. International Caries Detection and Assessment System (ICDAS) and its

International Caries Classification and Management System (ICCMS™) – methods for staging of the

caries process and enabling dentists to manage caries. Com Dent oral epidemid 2013;41:41–52. 12. Pitts nB. Detection, assessment, diagnosis and monitoring of caries. Basel: Karger; 2009. 13. [r] Pitts nB. the bitewing examination as a preventive aid to the control of approximal caries. Clin

Prev Dent 1984:6;12–5.

14. [r] Howard He. rethinking pedodontic radiology. J Dent Child 1981;48:192–7. 15. [r] nowak AJ. Miller JW. High yield pedodontic radiology. Gen Dent 1985;33:45–7. 16. Pitts nB. Score system for monitoring the behaviour of radiologically diagnosed approximal carious

lesions. Community Dent oral epidemiol 1985;13:268–72.

17. twetman S. Fontana M. Patient caries risk assessment. In Pitts nB. Detection, assessment, diagnosis

and monitoring of caries. Basel: Karger; 2009. p.91-101

18. Schutte AG, Pitts nB, Huysmans MC, Splieth C, Buchalla W. european core curriculum in cariology

for undergraduate dental students. eur J Dent educ 2011;15(suppl.):9-17. 19. Ismail AL et al. Caries managemnt pathways preserve dental tissues and promote oral health.

Community Dent oral epidemiol 2013;41:12–40.

20. Stephen KW, russell JI, Creanor SL. Burchell CK. Comparison of fibre optic transillumination with

clinical and radiographic caries diagnosis. Community Dent oral epidemiol 1987:15:90–4. 21. Stephens rG, Kogon SL, Wainright rJ, reid JA. Information yield from routine bitewing radiographs

for young adults. Can Dent Assoc 1981;47:247–52.

22. [r] Wenzel A, Pitts nB, Verdonschot eH, Kalsbeek H. Developments in radiographic caries diagnosis.

J Dent 1993;21:131–40.

23. de Araujo FB, rosito DB, toigo e, dos Santos CK. Diagnosis of approximal caries: radiographic

versus clinical examination using tooth separation. Am J Dent 1992;5:245–8. 24. Creanor SL, russell JI, Strang DM, Stephen KW, Burchell CK. the prevalence of clinically undetected

occlusal dentine caries in Scottish adolescents. Br Dent J 1990; 169:126–9.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 57

25. nytun rB, raadal M, espelid I. Diagnosis of dentin involvement in occlusal caries based on visual



and radiographic examination of the teeth. Scand J Dent res 1992:100:144–8. 26. Lussi A. Impact of including or excluding cavitated lesions when evaluating methods for the

diagnosis of occlusal caries. Caries res 1996;30:389-93.

27. Ketley C, Holt r. Visual and radiographic diagnosis of occlusal caries in first permanent molars and

in second primary molars. Br Dent J 1993;174:64–70.

28. Wenzel A Larsen MJ, Fejerskov o. Detection of occlusal caries without cavitation by visual inspection,

film radiographs, xeroradiographs, and digitized radiographs. Caries res 1991;25:365–71. 29. Levin L, Coval M, Geiger SB. Cross-sectional readiographic survey of amalgam and resin-based

composite posterior restorations. Quintessence Int 2007;38(6):511–4. 30. espelid I, tveit AB. Clinical and radiographic assessment of approximal carious lesions. Acta

odontol Scand 1986;44:31–7.

31. Lunder n, von der Fehr Fr. Approximal caviution related to bite-wing image and caries activity in

adolescents. Caries res 1996:30:143–7.

32. Kidd eAM, van Amerongen JP, van Amerongen We. the role of operative treatment in caries control.

In Fejerskov o. Kidd e. Dental Caries. the disease and its clinical management. 2nd edition.

Munksgaard: Blackwell; p357–365.

33. ricketts DnJ, Kidd eAM, Beighton D. operative and microbiological validation of visual.

radiographic and electronic diagnosis of occlusal caries in non–cavitated teeth judged to be in

need of operative care. Br Dent J 1995;179:214–20.

34. [r] Lervik t, Haugejorden o, Aas C. Progression of posterior approximal carious lesions in

norwegian teenagers from 1982 to 1986. Acta odontol Scand 1990;48:223–7. 35. [r] elderton rJ. Assessment and clinical management of early caries in young adults: Invasive

versus non-invasive methods. Br Dent J 1985; 158:440–4.

36. Kidd eA, naylor Hn, Wilson rF. Prevalence of clinically undetected and untreated molar occlusal

dentine caries in adolescents on the Isle of Wight. Caries res 1992;26:397–401. 37. richardson PS, Mclntyre IG. the difference between clinical and bitewing detection of approximal

and occlusal caries in royal Air force recruits. Community Dent Health 1996:13;65–9. 38. Mann J. Pettigrew JC, revach A. Arwas Jr. Kochavi D. Assessment of the DMf-S index with the use of

bitewing radiographs. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol. 1989;68:661–5. 39. White SC, Atchison KA, Hewlett er, Flack VF. efficacy of FDA guidelines for ordering radiographs for

caries detection. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol. 1994:77:531–40. 40. Peers A. Hill FJ, Mitropoulos CM, Holloway PJ. Validity and reproducibility of clinical examination,

fibre-optic transillumination. and bite-wing radiology for the diagnosis of small approximal carious

lesions: an in vitro study. Caries res 1993;27:307–11.

41. Stecksen-Blicks C. Wahlin Y-B. Diagnosis of approximal caries in pre-school children. Swed Dent J

1983;7;179–84.

42. rimmer PA. Pitts nB. effects of diagnostic threshold and overlapped approximal surfaces on

reported caries status. Community Dent oral epidemiol 1991; 19;205–12. 43. Weerheijm KL. Groen HJ. Bast AJJ. Kieft JA, eijkman MAJ, van Amerongen We. Clinically undetected

occlusal dentine caries: a radiographic comparison. Caries res 1992;26:305–9 44. rimmer PA, Pitts nB. temporary elective tooth separation as a diagnostic aid in general dental

practice. Br Dent J 1990;169:87–92.

45. ruiken HMHM. truin GJ. Konig KG. Feasibility of radiographical diagnosis in 8-year-old



58 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

schoolchildren with low caries activity. Caries res 1982;16:398–403. 46. Hintze H. Screening with conventional and digital bite-wing radiography compared to clinical

examination alone for caries detection in low-risk children. Caries res 1993;27:499–504. 47. [r] Pitts nB. Diagnostic tools and measurements impact on appropriate care. Community Dent oral

epidemiol 1997;25:24–35.

48. roeters FJM, Verdonschot eH, Bronkhorst eM, van’t Hof MA. Prediction of the need for bitewing

radiography in detecting caries in the primary dentition. Community Dent oral epidemiol

1994;22:456–60.

49. Deery C. An evaluation of the use of pit and fissure sealants in the General Dental Service in

Scotland [PhD thesis]. Dundee: University of Dundee; 1997.

50. Hintze H, Wenzel A, Frydenberg M. Accuracy of caries detection with four storage phosphor systems

and e-speed radiographs. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2002;31:170–5. 51. [r] Angmar-Mansson B, ten Bosch JJ. Advances in methods for diagnosing coronal caries – a review.

Adv Dent res 1993;7;70–9.

52. twetman S, Axelsson S, Dahlén G, espelid I, Mejàre I, norlund A, tranæus S. Adjunct methods for

caries detection: A systematic review of literature. Acta odontol Scand 2012; e-pub; 1-10. 53. Bader JD, Shugars DA, Bonito AJ. Systematic reviews of selected dental caries diagnostic and

management methods. J Dent educ 2001;65:960–8.

54. neuhaus KW, Longbottom C, ellwood r, Lussi A. novel lesion detection aids. In Pitts nB. Detection,

assessment, diagnosis and monitoring of caries. Basel: Karger; 2009. 55. [r] european Commission. radiation Protection 172. Cone beam Ct for dental and maxillofacial

radiology: evidence based guidelines. Luxembourg: european Commission; 2012. Available at:

https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/172.pdf Accessed: January 2018. 56. Pitts nB. Longbottom C. temporary tooth separation with special reference to the diagnosis and

preventive management of equivocal approximal carious lesions. Quintessence Int. 1987;18:563–73. 57. Pitts nB, rimmer PA An in vivo comparison of radiographic and directly assessed clinical caries status of

posterior approximal surfaces in primary and permanent teeth. Caries res 1992;26:146–52. 58. Seddon rP. the detection of cavitation in carious approximal surfaces in vivo by tooth separation,

impression and scanning electron microscopy. J Dent 1989;17:117.20. 59. Danielsen B, Wenzel A, Hintze H, nyvad B. temporary tooth separation as an aid in the diagnosis of

cavitation in approximal surfaces. Caries res 1996;30:271.

60. [r] Pine CM. Fibre-optic transillumination (FotI) in caries diagnosis. In: Stookey G, editor.

Proceedings of the first Annual Indiana Conference; early Detection of Dental Caries. Indiana:

Indiana University; 1996:51–65.

61. ricketts DnJ, Kidd eAM. Wilson rF. A re-evaluation of electrical resistance measurements for the

diagnosis of occlusal caries. Br Dent J 1995;178:11–7.

62. rock WP, Kidd eAM. the electronic detection of demineralisation in occlusal fissures. Br Dent J

1988;164:243–7.

63. [r] ricketts DnJ. electrical conduction detection methods. In: Stookey G. editor. Proceedings of the First

Annual Indiana Conference: early Detection of Dental Caries. Indiana: Indiana University; 1996. p.67. 64. Longbottom C, Huysmans MC, Pitts nB, Los P, Bruce PG. Detection of dental decay and its extent

using AC impedance spectroscopy. nat Med 1996;2:235–7.

65. Bader JD, Shugars DA. A systematic review of the performance of a laser fluorescence device for

detecting caries. J Am Dent Assoc 2004;135:1413–26.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 59

60 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



4 A L t E R n A t i v E A P P R o A C H t o A R A D i o G R A P H y F o R C A R i E S D i A G n o S i S i n C H i L D R E n





4A.1 tHE eAPD APPRoACH

Keith Horner and Ken Eaton



As highlighted in Section 4, the evidence that bitewing radiography can provide a

diagnostic yield for caries over and above that obtained through clinical diagnosis

alone is established, at least for high and moderate caries risk groups. However, there

is uncertainty in translating this evidence into recommendations concerning specific

intervals between bitewing examinations for regular patients. in this document, the

editors felt that it was important to highlight an alternative approach for prescription

of bitewing radiography in children, developed in 2004 by the European Academy

of Paediatric Dentistry (EAPD).1



the EAPD guidelines, based strongly on evidence from research in Scandinavian

countries, reiterated that additional information on the presence and depth of

caries may be obtained from bitewing radiography. to determine the interval between

review bitewing examinations in children, the EAPD guidelines classify patients into

“high risk” and “low risk” for caries, using similar criteria to those used in Section 4

of this document, but do not recognise a “moderate risk” category. the authors make

the following recommendations:

• Bitewing radiographs should be taken only if they are considered necessary

for adequate treatment.

• For both caries risk status groups (both high and low risk), 5-year-olds should

be considered for bitewing examination.

• For both caries risk status groups, bitewing radiographs should be considered

at the age of 8-9 years.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 61 • For both caries risk status groups, bitewing radiographs in the permanent

dentition should be considered at the age of 12-14 years (1-2 years after eruption

of premolars and second molars).



the recommendations presented in the guidelines are shown in table 4.1.

While not explicitly stated in the EAPD guidelines, it is assumed that a child attending

as a new patient between the ages listed above (eg. at age 6 years) might still be

considered for a baseline bitewing examination rather than waiting for the next

recommended age point.



Table 4.1: The baseline examinations and intervals to the next bitewing

examination in children (adapted from EAPD guidelines)1



Age of patient at baseline Interval to next bitewing examination bitewing examination

Low caries risk High caries risk

5 years 3 years 1 year

8-9 years 3-4 years 1 year

12-16 years 2 years 1 year

16 years 3 years 1 year



the EAPD guidelines recommend less frequent bitewing examinations than Section 4.

the editors do not feel able to judge definitively between these two approaches and

concluded that inclusion of the EAPD recommendations as a valid alternative strategy

was appropriate. in terms of the evidence-based approach used by the FGDP(UK), the

EAPD guidelines would be judged as grade C (expert opinion).



Readers are recommended to read the full EAPD guideline.1 in the light of the different

strategies for use of radiographs for caries diagnosis in children, dental teams may find

this a valuable subject for in-practice discussion.



62 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 4A.2 reFerenCe

1. espelid I, Mejàre I, Weerheijm K. eAPD guidelines for use of radiographs in children. eur J Paediatr

Dent 2003;4:40–8. Available at: http://www.eapd.gr/12A5AeCC.en.aspx. Accessed: July 2013.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 63

64 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



5 R A D i o G R A P H S i n P E R i o D o n t A L A S S E S S M E n t



5.1 intRoDUCtion

Aradhna Tugnait and Peter Heasman



A large number of research papers have looked at the use of radiographs in

periodontal assessment. Much of this work includes the use of radiography to assist

and confirm a periodontal diagnosis, to help determine prognosis of the disease and

to monitor long-term treatment outcomes. Many studies compare the performance

of different radiographic techniques. However, since the majority of these papers

are insufficiently directed towards selection criteria, they were not included in this

document.



the following points emerged from the papers and guidelines that were reviewed:1–30

• the diagnosis of periodontal diseases depends on a thorough clinical examination

supplemented by radiographs, where they may provide additional information

that could potentially change patient management or prognosis.4R,18R,19

• Clinicians should always use radiographs taken for caries diagnosis to aid the

assessment of the periodontal hard tissues.18R

• there is no clear evidence to support any recommendations regarding the

frequency of radiographs taken for periodontal reasons.

• Radiographic assessment of changes in alveolar bone can be improved if

sequential intraoral radiographs are placed reproducibly to allow accurate

evaluation of changes in the radiographic geometry over time.2R,3R,7R

• there appears to be no evidence on when to take a periapical radiograph to assist

in the diagnosis or treatment of periodontal/endodontic lesions.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 65 • the bitewing projection offers both optimal geometry and the fine detail inherent

to intraoral radiography. Bitewings have the additional advantage that when

they have already been indicated for caries assessment, they offer a means of

providing information about bone levels around teeth without the need for an

additional radiation dose.9

• Full-mouth series of periapical radiographs and panoramic radiographs with

supplementary periapicals have been used for periodontal evaluation, with

the latter potentially affording a radiation dose advantage over large numbers

of intraoral radiographs. the dose from periapical radiographs may, however,

be less than that from panoramic and supplementary periapical combinations,

if periapicals are restricted to affected teeth.21

• When assessing alveolar bone levels, digital radiographs may offer improved

measurement accuracy and greater agreement between different observers

compared with film radiographs.22,23

• CBCt may offer greater accuracy than conventional two-dimensional intraoral

imaging, with superior imaging of bone defects and furcation lesions compared

with conventional radiographs.24,27 CBCt is not, however, indicated as a routine

method of imaging periodontal bone support; evidence-based guidelines for

CBCt should be consulted for further guidance on its use.26



5.2 RECoMMEnDAtionS

there is insufficient evidence from research into radiographic selection criteria for

periodontology to allow for robust, evidence-based recommendations. However,

the following are proposed as good practice:



C CBCt is not indicated as a routine method of imaging periodontal bone support.



66 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

C if a patient has generalised pocketing of 4–5 mm (BPE scores of maximum Code 3 in any sextant) and little or no recession, horizontal bitewings are recommended. these may be supplemented by intraoral periapicals for selected anterior teeth, but only if this is likely to change management of the patient.



C Assessment of all teeth and their periodontal support can be achieved by an optimal-quality panoramic radiograph alone, a panoramic radiograph with supplementary periapical radiographs, or a complete series of periapical radiographs. When determining which radiographic technique to use,

consideration should be given to the clinical presentation,

the required image quality and the relative dose-benefit based

on the equipment available.



C A periapical radiograph using a paralleling technique is indicated if a periodontal/endodontic lesion is suspected.



C if a patient has pocketing of 6 mm or more (BPE scores of Code 4), vertical bitewing radiographs are recommended, supplemented by intraoral periapical views using the paralleling technique at sites where alveolar bone image is not included. these may be supplemented by intraoral periapicals for selected anterior teeth,

but only if this is likely to change management of the patient.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 67

C Where CBCt images include the teeth, care should be taken to check for periodontal bone levels when performing a clinical evaluation (report).



it should be emphasised that:

• the use of radiography is secondary to a clinical examination and full mouth

periodontal assessment.1R,4–6R,18R,19

• Existing radiographs should be used as far as possible; the extent of bone loss

on existing radiographs used with the clinical examination can enable selection

of appropriate radiographic views. Previous radiographs may be useful in

assessing the rate of disease progression.

• the decision to take further radiographs for the purpose of assessing changes

of the periodontal support over time should be on a case-by-case basis, with

radiographs secondary to the clinical examination, when they have the potential

to change patient management.1R,4–6R,18R,19



68 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 5.3 REFEREnCES

1. [r] Absi eG. An evidence-based approach to guidelines in dental radiography. Postgrad Dent

1996;6:26–34.

2. [r] Benn DK. A review of the reliability of radiographic measurements in estimating alveolar bone

changes. J Clin Periodontol 1990;17:14–21.

3. [r] Gutteridge DL. the use of radiographic techniques in the diagnosis and management of

periodontal diseases. Dentomaxillofac radiol 1995;24:107–13.

4. [r] Hirschmann Pn. radiographic interpretation of chronic periodontitis. Int Dent J 1987;37:3–9. 5. [r] Hirschmann Pn, Horner K, rushton Ve. Selection criteria for periodontal radiography. Br Dent J

1994;176:324–5.

6. [r] Stephens rG, Kogon SL. new US guidelines for prescribing dental radiographs. J Can Dent Assoc

1990;56:1019–24.

7. [r] Wennstrom JL. Interpretation of radiographic data on longitudinal loss of periodontal

attachment. J Periodontol 1990;61:459–61.

8. Walsh tF, Al-Hokail oS, Fosam eB. the relationship of bone loss observed on panoramic

radiographs with clinical periodontal screening. J Clin Periodontol 1997;24:153–7. 9. eaton KA, Woodman AJ. evaluation of a simple periodontol screening technique used in the UK

Armed Forces. Community Dent oral epidemiol 1989;17:17–22.

10. Goodson JM, Haffajee AD, Socransky SS. the relationship between attachment level loss and

alveolar bone loss. J Clin Periodontol 1984;11:348–59.

11. [r] Jeffcoat MK. radiographic methods for the detection of progressive alveolar bone loss. J

Periodontol 1992;63:367–72.

12. Molander B, Ahlqwist M, Grondahl H-G, Hollender L. Agreement between panoramic and intraoral

radiography in the assessment of marginal bone height. Dentomaxillofac radiol 1991;20:155–60. 13. osbourne Ge, Hemmings KW. A survey of disease changes observed on dental panoramic

tomographs taken of patients attending a periodontal clinic. Br Dent J 1992;173:166–8. 14. rams te, Listgarten MA, Slots J. Utility of radiographic crestal lamina dura for predicting

periodontitis disease activity. J Clin Periodontol 1994;21:571–6.

15. Akesson L, rohlin M, Hakansson H, nasstrom K. Comparison between panoramic and posterior

bitewing radiography in the diagnosis of periodontal bone loss. J Dent 1989;17:266–71. 16. Jeffcoat MK, reddy MS. Progression of probing attachment loss in adult periodontitis. J Periodontol

1991;62:185–9.

17. rohlin M, Akesson L, Hakansson H, nasstrom K. Comparison between panoramic and periapical

radiography in the diagnosis of periodontal bone loss. Dentomaxillofac radiol 1989;18:72–6. 18. [r] tugnait A, Clerehugh V, Hirschmann Pn. the usefulness of radiographs in diagnosis and

management of periodontal diseases: a review. J Dent 2000;28:219–26. 19. White SC, Heslop eW, Hollender LG, Mosier KM, ruprecht A, Shrout MK. Parameters of radiologic

care: An official report of the American Academy of oral and Maxillofacial radiology. oral Surg oral

Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod 2001;91:498–511.

20. Molander B, Ahlqwist M, Gröndahl HG. Image quality in panoramic radiography. Dentomaxillofacial

radiology 1995;24:17–22.

21. Jenkins WMM, Brocklebank LM, Winning SM, Wylupek M, Donaldson A, Strang rM. A comparison

of two radiographic assessment protocols for patients with periodontal disease. Br Dent J

2005;198:565–569.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 69

22. Li G, engstrom Pe, nasstrom K, Lu ZY, Sanderink G, Welander U. Marginal bone levels measured



in film and digital radiographs corrected for attenuation and visual response: an in vivo study.

Dentomaxillofac radiol 2007;36:7–11.

23. Henriksson CH, Stermer eM, Aass AM, Sandvik L, Moystad A. Comparison of the reproducibility of

storage phosphor and film bitewings for assessment of alveolar bone loss. Acta odontol Scand

2008;66:380–384.

24. Vandenberghe B, Jacobs r, Yang J. Detection of periodontal bone loss using digital intraoral and

cone beam computed tomography images: an in vitro assessment of bony and/or infrabony

defects. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2008;37:252–260.

25. [r] SBU – Swedish Council on Health technology Assessment. Chronic periodontitis-prevention,

diagnosis and treatment. Stockholm: SBU; 2004. Available at: http://sbu.se/en/Published/Yellow/

Chronic-Periodontitis---Prevention-Diagnosis-and-treatment. Accessed: September 2013. 26. [r] european Commission. radiation Protection 172. Cone beam Ct for dental and maxillofacial

radiology: evidence based guidelines. Luxembourg: european Commission; 2012. Available at:

https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/172.pdf. Accessed: January 2018. 27. Walter C, Weiger r, Zitzmann nU. Accuracy of three-dimensional imaging in assessing maxillary

molar furcation involvement. J Clin Periodontol 2010;37:436–441.



70 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

6 R A D i o G R A P H S i n E n D o D o n t i C S



6.1 intRoDUCtion

Shanon Patel and William Saunders



Radiographs are essential during both surgical and non-surgical root canal

treatment. A diagnosis, especially involving pain, may be possible without the

need for radiographs but it is not possible to undertake the mechanical aspects of

treatment adequately without prior knowledge of the root canal anatomy and the

configuration and final radiological confirmation that treatment has been completed.

in addition, radiographs are an essential aid in the follow-up of treatment to

ascertain changes in the periradicular tissues, commensurate with healing.1



6.2 EnDoDontiC DiAGnoSiS

A careful and complete investigation of the history of the patient’s complaint,

combined with a thorough clinical examination, may produce sufficient information

to formulate a provisional diagnosis. it is often difficult to correlate signs and

symptoms with pulpal and periradicular pathology. therefore, a good-quality pre-

operative radiograph will provide additional information to aid diagnosis (Figure

6.1). At least one pre-operative periapical radiograph is necessary for this diagnostic

phase. occasionally a second image from a different vertical or horizontal angle may

be required (Figure 6.2). More advanced radiological techniques may be required

when the diagnostic yield from conventional radiographs does not give sufficient

useful information.2



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 71



Figure 6.1 This view of an upper second molar Figure 6.2 A second radiograph of the same show palatal and mesio-buccal roots clearly tooth. The angulation is different (the same but the disto-buccal root is obscured. effect may be achieved by altering centering of





the beam) and the files in the mesio-buccal and

palatal canals have been removed, leaving just

one file in what was thought to be the disto-

buccal canal but is in fact a distal perforation.

The unfortunate result is now clear.



B A good-quality pre-operative radiograph is essential for diagnosis of endodontic problems.



6.3 Root CAnAL tREAtMEnt PLAnninG

Assuming that the tooth either has an irreversible pulpitis or periradicular disease

of endodontic origin, the pre-operative radiograph will confirm not only the

diagnosis, but also reveal possible difficulties likely to be encountered during

treatment, and also any other disease associated with the tooth, including

periodontal disease and dental caries. Root canal treatment should only be carried

out if the tooth is restorable, and has a good long-term prognosis as a functional

unit. Whilst there are no true contra-indications to root canal treatment, treatment

planning must be carried out holistically, bearing in mind the state of the remaining

dentition, the wishes of the patient and the alternative treatment strategies available

if the tooth were to be extracted.



72 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) one cannot over-emphasise that radiological examination does not provide

a definitive diagnosis of the state either of the pulp or periradicular tissues.



6.3.1 Non-surgical root canal treatment

Prior to making decisions regarding root canal treatment, the pre-operative

radiograph(s) should be used to ascertain the following information:

• Form and extent of the dental pulp, including both the coronal part and

the root canals. Look out for the presence of tertiary dentine coronally,

discrete mineralisation such as pulp stones and sclerosis of the root canals.

• the number of roots.

• Approximate length of the tooth and the crown-root ratio.

• Shape of the root, the amount of curvature and the configuration of that

curvature. A curve in the apical portion is more difficult to manage than

a curve that starts halfway down the root.

• Angulation of the roots.

• Proximity of other anatomical structures, including the maxillary antrum,

the inferior dental canal and the mental foramen.

• Amount of supporting bone present.

• Size, shape and position of any periradicular lesion present.

• Evidence and nature of previous root canal treatment, and the type and

quality of the coronal restoration present. Marginal defects, including

overhangs and recurrent caries may be seen and will influence treatment

planning. the presence of pins and posts may also be detected.



if it is not possible to gain sufficient diagnostic power from one periapical radiograph

then supplementary views should be considered. this is usually achieved using a

second periapical radiograph with a shift of horizontal beam angulation, typically

some 10–20 degrees from a mesial or distal direction, to achieve parallax images. this

allows separation of roots and may eliminate overlap of anatomical structures, such

as the zygomatic arch, with maxillary molars.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 73 6.3.2 Surgical root canal treatment

the same essential information as for non-surgical root canal treatment applies when

a surgical approach is being considered. in most cases, orthograde treatment has

already been undertaken. other aspects pertinent to a surgical approach include:

• the likely final length of the root with respect to periodontal bone support

• the proximity of adjacent anatomical structures (eg. the inferior dental nerve

and its branches, the maxillary sinus)

• Evidence of root fracture

• Presence of a perforation, either by a post or root canal filling

• Presence of an accessory canal with associated radiolucency

• Presence of extruded obturation material

• the size of the periradicular lesion.



6.4 Root CAnAL tREAtMEnt

the aim of non-surgical root canal treatment is to shape and clean the root canal

system, removing diseased pulpal tissue and reducing microbial load. the shaping

allows more thorough disinfection by irrigation with antimicrobial agents, and

facilitates sealing the root canal system with a biocompatible obturation system.

Each root canal should be disinfected up to the apical constriction, ie. where the

pulp tissue meets the periodontal tissue. the distance from the most coronal

reference point to the apical constriction is known as the ‘working length’. obturation

material placed at or beyond this level has been shown to be associated with severe

inflammation, even in the absence of clinical symptoms.3 Accurate determination

of the working length is essential for a successful outcome in endodontic treatment.



traditionally, this level of instrumentation has been determined radiologically, an

image being taken with an instrument in the root canal. However, it is not possible

to determine the position of the apical constriction accurately using traditional

radiological techniques. this is because the constriction is rarely at the radiological

apex of the tooth.



74 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 6.4.1 Electronic apex locators

Electronic apex locators work on the principle that there is a consistent value

of electrical resistance between an instrument in the root canal and an electrode

on the oral mucous membrane. the most recent generation of apex locators use

impedance measurements instead of resistance to measure the location of a metal

instrument in the root canal. these instruments are self-calibrating, using a ratio

method. this works on the principle that two electric currents with different sine

wave frequencies will have measureable impedances that can be compared. the

advantage of these instruments is that they can be used in the presence of electrolyte.

An excellent review of these instruments has been provided by Gordon and Chandler,4

and they have been shown to be reliable for the determination of working length

when used correctly.5



Electronic apex locators are not a panacea for determining working length.

the presence of large amounts of fluid in the root canal system, metal coronal

restorations or a large apical foramen all affect performance adversely.6 Although

frequent use of a locator improves performance, it may still be considered necessary

to confirm the length radiologically.



Most root canal preparation techniques advocate the use of a crown-to-apex

approach. the undistorted pre-operative radiograph allows the clinician to measure

the length of the tooth, thus allowing the working length to be determined, after

which the endodontic files should be marked or fitted with stops to ensure that the

apical extent of preparation is not violated. After some initial preparation of the

coronal part of the root canal, and use of an electronic apex locator, if available, a

radiograph (working length radiograph) should be taken with the endodontic file in

place to confirm the working length. if this diagnostic file is more than 3 mm from

the proposed working length then the length should adjusted and a further radiograph

taken. in molars it may be necessary to use files of different configuration (such as

Flexofiles and Hedstroms) to distinguish root canals that lie in the same plane of

the x-ray beam (for example, mesio-buccal and mesio-lingual canals in lower molar

teeth). Alternatively, more than one radiograph may be taken to determine the

working length for all root canals.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 75

C Unless there is confidence about working length(s) derived from an electronic apex locator, at least one good-quality radiograph is necessary to confirm working length(s).



Additional radiographs may be taken

during root canal treatment to confirm



that working length(s) have been

maintained. For example, ‘master’

obturation gutta percha points may be

seated within the root canal(s) and a

radiograph taken to confirm that they

are at the appropriate length (Figure

6.3). in addition, especially if a heated

Figure 6.3 Working length radiograph of lower

right first molar tooth. obturation technique is employed

and the tooth has an open apex or

compromised apical constriction, a

radiograph may be taken after the initial “downpack” of the master cone to ensure

that the correct length has been achieved.



C if there are any doubts about the integrity of the apical constriction or resistance taper of the prepared root canal, a mid-fill radiograph should be taken to confirm the position of the root filling before final compaction is carried out.



in surgical cases, it may be reasonable to take a radiograph of the periradicular

tissues prior to suturing to ensure that an adequate root-end filling has been placed

and that debridement of the tissues has been completed, especially if there had been

a previous overfill or extrusion of material.



76 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 6.5 EnDoDontiC FoLLoW-UP

A radiograph should be taken immediately after the root canal treatment has been

completed. this applies equally to surgical and non-surgical treatment and provides

a baseline reference for subsequent review of the treatment. With molar teeth

it may be necessary to take more than one post-operative view. Preferably these

radiographs should be processed and reported before the patient leaves the surgery.



An immediate post-operative radiograph will help to provide:

• A rudimentary (two-dimensional) assessment of the quality of the treatment,

including length, presence of voids and apical extrusion.

• A baseline for subsequent review.

• An indication of possible complicating factors such as apical ‘zipping’,

transportation of the root canal shape, perforation and areas of potential physical

weakness in the tooth as a consequence of over-preparation.

• An indication of potential ways in which the tooth may be restored, including

post length, diameter and, if no restoration is present to mask the image, the

amount of remaining tooth structure coronally may also be assessed.



C At least one post-operative radiograph is necessary to assess the success of the obturation, and to act as a baseline for assessment of apical pathology or healing.



the ideal follow-up for assessing healing of periradicular disease remains controversial,

as are the criteria for success. Certainly radiological examination alone is insufficient,

and must be combined with a careful clinical assessment. the main radiological

criterion for judging success is a reduction in the size of a pre-existing periradicular

radiolucency. However, research has shown that periapical radiography has a low

sensitivity, ie. it is not able to detect all periapical radiolucencies.7



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 77 the difficulty in diagnosing the presence of disease is complicated further by the

histological nature of the radiolucency. Healing may take place by the formation

of a fibrous scar rather than new bone. However, it has been shown that the

incidence of scar formation is actually quite low, about 2%.8



the time required for follow-up continues to be debated, but recent arguments

suggest that one year is probably reasonable. if the radiolucency shows evidence

of reduction at that time then further review is unnecessary. there is an argument

that should there be no change after one year, then further treatment should be

considered.9 Pragmatically, however, if incomplete healing is seen after one year

then the patient should be recalled in a further year when clinical signs can be

reviewed and a further radiological examination carried out. it may be that the

four-year follow-up period as proposed in guidelines from the European Society

of Endodontology10 may not be necessary.



B A further follow-up radiograph should be taken at one year after completion of treatment. 11



the PAi system is being used more frequently for assessment of success. in this system

periradicular radiolucencies are categorised with scores of 1 to 5, score 1 representing

periapical health and all other scores representing periradicular disease, with

increasing size of the radiolucency (up to 5). the validity of using this classification

has been questioned, however, as it was originally developed for maxillary incisors

and therefore may not apply to other teeth.12



78 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 6.6 otHER EnDoDontiC tREAtMEntS

6.6.1 Vital pulp procedures

Pulp capping and pulpotomy are performed to retain pulp vitality, especially in teeth

with immature apices. A radiograph is necessary at the time of initial treatment to

inform treatment planning and provide a baseline for evaluation of the procedure.

Radiological review of teeth treated in this way should be undertaken periodically but

only combined with a full clinical examination. Radiological success may manifest

in the formation of a hard-tissue bridge at the site of the pulp dressing, continued

root development and root-end closure. if a tooth treated in this way becomes

symptomatic or clinical signs of failure are apparent, then radiographs will be

required for further treatment planning.



C A baseline radiograph is essential for treatment planning in vital pulp procedures.



6.6.2 Dental trauma

teeth that have been subjected to trauma require careful examination, which includes

the use of radiographs. A baseline intraoral radiograph is mandatory following

all but minor tooth trauma. in many cases trauma is sustained by children and

cooperation is important. Depending on the nature of the injury it may be necessary

to take several intraoral radiographs from different angles. Extraoral views, including

anterior occlusals, are sometimes useful for luxation injuries. in some instances a

small field-of-view cone beam computer tomography (CBCt) scan may be desirable

to assess the true nature of luxation injuries and/or cortical plate involvement.

Periodic review of injured teeth is essential, including those with horizontal root

fractures, where pathological changes at the fracture site can be detected only with

the help of radiological examination.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 79 Finally, the American Association of Endodontists has produced a study guide that

gives an overview of pertinent literature.13



C A baseline radiograph(s) is essential for the management of minor tooth trauma. Follow-up radiographs should be taken at six months after treatment, and then annually until root formation is complete. While expert opinion supports the taking of review radiographs, there is no evidence to support any

particular frequency or duration of review.



6.7 ConE BEAM CoMPUtED toMoGRAPHy

the use of CBCt in endodontics is the subject of active research, and there is some

evidence that it has a useful role in diagnosis where conventional radiography fails

to provide adequate diagnostic information.14–21



Selection criteria for CBCt in dentistry have been published by the European

Commission following comprehensive systematic review by the SEDEntExCt

project.22 Criteria for CBCt use in endodontics are included, but the authors of these

guidelines acknowledged some important limitations:

• the evidence base remains limited.

• not all CBCt equipment is the same, particularly with regard to resolution.

• Radiation doses are generally higher than those associated with conventional

radiography.

• Significant artefacts are produced by metallic dental restorations that can

profoundly reduce image quality.



in an endodontic context, the final bullet point is of particular importance where

a tooth, or nearby teeth, contain metal posts or there are adjacent implants. As

a result, in the current document, we take a cautious view about the use of CBCt

in endodontics, and essentially reproduce the selection criteria derived from the

European document.22



80 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

C CBCt is not indicated as a standard method for demonstration of root canal anatomy.



C Limited-volume, high-resolution CBCt may be indicated for selected cases where conventional intraoral radiographs provide information on root canal anatomy which is equivocal or inadequate for planning treatment, most probably in multi-rooted teeth.



C Limited-volume, high-resolution CBCt may be indicated for selected cases when planning surgical endodontic procedures. the decision should be based upon potential complicating factors, such as the proximity of important anatomical structures.



C Limited-volume, high-resolution CBCt may be indicated in selected cases of suspected, or established, external resorption or internal resorption, where three-dimensional information is likely to alter the management or prognosis of the tooth.



ContinUED...



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 81

C Limited-volume, high-resolution CBCt may be justifiable for selected cases where endodontic treatment is complicated by concurrent factors, such as resorption lesions, combined periodontal/endodontic lesions, suspected perforations, treatment planning prior to periapical microsurgery and

atypical root canal anatomy.



in every case being considered for CBCt, careful thought should be given to whether

the CBCt equipment is capable of providing the limited volumes (fields of view), and

whether high-resolution images required for endodontic imaging can be obtained

without an unacceptable increase in radiation dose.



82 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 6.8 REFEREnCES

1. Forsberg J, Halse A. radiographic simulation of a periapical lesion comparing the paralleling and

the bisecting angle techniques. Int endod J 1994;27:133–8.

2. Patel S. new dimensions in endodontic imaging: part 2. Cone beam computed tomography. Int

endod J 2009;42:463–75.

3. ricucci D, Langeland K. Apical limit of root canal instrumentation and obturation, part 2. A

histological study. Int endod J 1998;31:394–409.

4. Gordon MPJ, Chandler nP. electronic apex locators. Int endod J 2004;37:425–37. 5. Haffner C, Folwaczny M, Galler K, Hickel r. Accuracy of electronic apex locators in comparison to

actual length – an in vivo study. J Dent 2005;33:619–25.

6. Kang J-A, Kim SK. Accuracies of seven different apex locators under various conditions. oral Surg

oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod 2008;106:e57–e62.

7. Paula-Silva FWG, Wu M-K, Leonardo Mr, da Silva LAB, Wesselink Pr. Accuracy of periapical

radiography and cone beam computed tomography in diagnosing apical periodontitis using

histopathological findings as a gold standard. J endod 2009; 35: 1009–12. 8. Love rM, Firth n Histopathological profile of surgically removed persistent radiolucent lesions of

endodontic origin. Int endod J 2009;42:198–202.

9. Wu M-K, Wesselink Pr. timeliness and effectiveness in the surgical management of persistent post-

treatment periapical pathosis. endodontic topics 2005;11:25–31. 10. Quality guidelines for endodontic treatment: consensus report of the european Society of

endodontology. Int endod J 2006;39:921–30.

11. orstavik D. time-course and risk analyses of the development and healing of chronic apical

periodontitis in man. Int endod J 1996;29:150–5.

12. Wu M-K, Shemesh H, Wesselink Pr. Limitations of previously published systematic reviews

evaluating the outcome of endodontic treatment. Int endod J 2009;42:656–66. 13. American Association of endodontists. endodontic radiology: An online study guide J endod

2008;34(5 suppl):e117–e119.

14. Lofthag-Hansen S, Huumonen S, Gröndahl K, Gröndahl H-G. Limited cone-beam Ct and intraoral

radiography for the diagnosis of periapical pathology. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol

endod 2007;103;114–19.

15. nakata K, naitoh M, Izumi M, Inamoto K, Ariji e, nakamura H. effectiveness of dental computed

tomography in diagnostic imaging of periradicular lesion of each root of a multirooted tooth: A

case report. J endod 2006;32:583–7.

16. rigolone M, Pasqualini D, Bianchi L, Berutti e, Bianchi SD. Vestibular surgical access to the palatine

root of the superior first molar: “low-dose cone-beam” Ct analysis of the pathway and its anatomic

variations. J endod 2003;29,773–5.

17. Cotton tP, Geisler tM, Holden Dt, Schwartz SA, Schindler WG . endodontic applications of cone-

beam volumetric tomography. J endod 2007;29:1121–1132.

18. Patel S, Dawood A, Whaites e, Pitt Ford t. the potential applications of cone beam computed

tomography in the management of endodontic problems. Int endod J 2007;40:818–830. 19. Patel S, Dawood A, Whaites e, Pitt Ford t. new dimensions in endodontic imaging: part 1.

Conventional and alternative radiographic systems. Int endod J 2009;42:447–462. 20. Patel S, Dawood A, Wilson r, Horner K, Mannocci F. the detection and management of root

resorption lesions using intraoral radiography and cone beam computed tomography – an in vivo

investigation. Int endod J 2009;42:831–38



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 83 21. Patel S, Horner K . editorial: the use of cone beam computed tomography in endodontics. Int

endod J 2009;42:755–6.

22. [r] european Commission. radiation Protection 172. Cone beam Ct for dental and maxillofacial

radiology: evidence based guidelines. Luxembourg: european Commission; 2012. Available at:

https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/172.pdf . Accessed: January 2018.



84 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

7 R A D i o G R A P H S i n i M P L A n t D E n t i S t R y



7.1 intRoDUCtion

Crawford Gray and Richard Palmer



the literature on radiology in implant dentistry was reviewed by a MEDLinE and

PubMed search, examination of review papers,1–4 consensus documents,5–7 a review

of relevant sections of two textbooks on implant dentistry,8,9 and two textbooks of

oral radiology.10,11 From these, it was clear that there is considerable knowledge of the

value of the various imaging methods used in implant dentistry. However, there was

some disagreement on the selection criteria in individual clinical situations, and little

information on the frequency and duration of follow-up radiographs after treatment

completion. overall, it can be concluded that, at present, there is a limited evidence

base on which to formulate guidelines for the use of radiographs in implant dentistry.



in implant dentistry, radiography plays a crucial role in treatment planning (see table

7.1), the assessment of available bone, and reviewing long-term maintenance. Successful

implant placement is facilitated by the availability of adequate information about the

quantity and quality of bone at the proposed implant site in relation to the position and

design of the planned prosthesis. Radiology is also needed to assess existing natural teeth

and healing of extraction sockets where implant placement is planned. Routine radiology

does not allow visualisation of the process of osseointegration, ie. the attachment of bone

to an implant surface. However, the presence of peri-implant radiolucency may suggest

fibrous tissue encapsulation/epithelial downgrowth indicative of implant failure.3 Baseline

radiographic examination is usually recommended at the completion of the prosthodontic

phase of treatment to assess marginal bone levels for future reference and to check on the

correct connection of the implant components. Further paralleled images should be made

at appropriate post-treatment intervals to monitor peri-implant bone levels.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 85

Table 7.1: Radiology for treatment planning in implant dentistry



SingLE imPLAnT

Anterior maxilla Periapical radiograph. If cross-sectional information is needed,

possibly use limited-volume CBCt.

Premolar maxilla Periapical and/or panoramic radiograph. If cross-sectional

information is needed, possibly use limited-volume CBCt.

Molar maxilla Periapical and/or panoramic radiograph. If cross-sectional

information is needed, possibly use limited-volume CBCt,

especially to visualise the antral floor.

Anterior mandible Periapical radiograph. If cross-sectional information is needed,

possibly use limited-volume CBCt to show lingual fossae.

Post-foraminal mandible Periapical and/or panoramic radiograph. to show three-

dimensional position of the inferior dental canal and to

investigate concavities of lingual/submandibular fossae,

possibly use limited-volume CBCt.

muLTiPLE imPLAnTS

Multiple exposures using the above guidance can become unwieldy and carry significant radiation exposure. A good panoramic radiograph with magnification markers can often give excellent information. Where cross-sectional information is needed, Ct, limited or full-volume CBCt should be used, if the exposure is likely to improve the outcome for patient and surgeon. MrI could be considered as it entails no exposure to ionising radiation.

if REquiRED DuRing SuRgERy

Periapical radiographs should be used, with radiographic measurement markers. For ease of use during surgery, the use of a digital system should be considered.

PoST-oPERATivE

Periapical and/or panoramic radiographs may be used.

gEnERAL guiDAnCE AnD PoST-TREATmEnT REviEw

Periapical and panoramic radiographs give good two-dimensional information, but the surgeon must be aware of potential magnification and patient positioning errors. the use of sectional imaging is appropriate in complex and anatomically challenging cases, but the surgeon should be aware of the need to reduce the dose by using CBCt and MrI rather than conventional Ct. In all cases, the technique employed should justify the radiation dose.

Post-operative review protocols appear to be the subjective opinion of authors. A radiograph at completion of the restoration and 12 months later may be considered essential in gaining baseline data and assessment of any changes in bone levels due to factors such as remodelling, function or inflammation. An ongoing review interval of one, three, or up to five years is suggested, to verify stability of bone levels or to detect progressive bone loss. A careful clinical examination should be able to indicate a stable situation, but it is advisable to obtain radiographic evidence of bone levels if signs are present that may suggest deterioration, eg. increased probing depth, bleeding, exudate, mobility.



86 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

Table 7.2: Recommended two-dimensional imaging for implant dentistry



Intraoral Panoramic radiography radiography

Maxilla

Single tooth X

Dentate X X

edentulous X (single site) X

Mandible

Single tooth X

Dentate X X

edentulous X (single site) X



Sectional imaging is commonly used in complex cases, and sophisticated three-

dimensional radiological techniques may be employed to formulate treatment

protocols or to construct guides for surgical implant placement and prefabrication

of prostheses.12



the choice of radiographic technique used in implant dentistry is further complicated

by a number of factors, including the experience of the surgeon. While an

experienced practitioner may have adequate information from a site using two-

dimensional imaging, a less experienced practitioner may feel more confident having

the additional information gained from a three-dimensional technique. As with any

radiological investigation, dose limitation is a paramount factor in the choice of the

imaging modality.



7.2 REviEW oF RADioLoGiCAL tECHniqUES

of the many radiological techniques available, the following are relevant to implant

dentistry.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 87 7.2.1 Periapical radiography

Periapical radiographs are commonly used in dental implant treatment planning.

Apart from being the most appropriate method of assessing the remaining teeth and

edentulous areas for pathology and the position of anatomical structures, periapical

radiographs are often used to assess the bone height available.



the main limitation in the use of periapical radiographs is that the image is only

two-dimensional, with no information of the third dimension (bone width or bucco-

lingual position of the neurovascular bundle). they may be the radiograph of choice

for single tooth replacement in uncomplicated sites, and are particularly useful

to assess spaces that may appear narrow or where root convergence is suspected.

Following surgery, they may be used to assess whether placement has been

satisfactory in terms of spacing, angulation and depth. in cases where anatomical

structures might limit safe implant placement, a stepwise approach may be adopted

using a radiopaque graduated depth gauge, placed to a known depth in the

osteotomy site. A periapical radiograph aligned using a paralleling technique is then

exposed, allowing the operator to accurately measure distances to vital structures

such as the inferior dental nerve. For more difficult cases pre-operative sectional

imaging should be considered. Periapical radiographs may also be used to monitor

the peri-implant hard tissues at post placement intervals (see tables 7.1 and 7.2).



it is best practice to use image receptor holders and the paralleling technique

in periapical radiography. All intraoral radiographs are magnified to a degree

dependent upon the focus, object and image receptor geometry. With a good

paralleling technique and avoidance of distorting the film/sensor this can be kept

to a minimum and should not unduly affect planning of implant length/diameter.

A reference object of known size, such as a metal ball bearing, may be imaged in the

same plane as the alveolus, and accurate distances can be calculated. the markers

need to be placed close to the site being proposed for implant placement, and may

be incorporated within a stent or denture. Even with paralleling, the accuracy of

radiographs may be within a ±2.5 mm range.13 imaging can be a problem when

dealing with a resorbed edentulous alveolus, where the image receptor holder may

dig into the palate or lingual sulcus. the use of cotton wool rolls between



88 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) the edentulous ridge and bite block may help; nevertheless, in some cases,

periapical images may show little more than the superficial few millimetres

of bone. this limitation may lead the clinician to use other specialised techniques.



it should be noted that many of the direct digital periapical radiographic sensors

are bulky, and although they may give virtually instantaneous images (with reduced

radiation dose) it is often impossible to achieve a good paralleling technique.

Although they do not offer instant imaging, digital radiography using phosphor

plates allows far simpler placement of the image receptor.



in all dental periapical radiography, rectangular collimation using a suitable

paralleling technique should be employed.



7.2.2 Occlusal radiography

true occlusal radiographs, while having no role in maxillary implant planning, may

rarely be useful in mandibular implant planning. the image may help to demonstrate

the course of the inferior alveolar canal; however, the images only show the maximal

buccolingual bone width, giving no indication of the cross-sectional jaw shape. As

with periapical radiographs, magnification of images should be considered.



7.2.3 Panoramic radiography

Simple panoramic images provide general information about bone height, the

position of anatomical structures such as the inferior dental canal, mental foramen

and maxillary antral floor, and a limited indication of bone quality. one of the most

critical areas is the visualisation of the inferior dental canal, mental foramen and

the complex morphology of the canal to avoid damage to the nerve during implant

placement. Panoramic radiographs may be considered adequate for implants placed

in the posterior mandible, providing a minimum 2 mm or preferably 4 mm safety

margin is adopted,14 and bone width is judged to be clinically sufficient (see tables

7.1 and 7.2).



it is extremely important to remember that panoramic images are magnified by up to

30%, and that such magnification may vary significantly at different locations within



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 89 the same radiograph, depending upon the equipment used. it is essential that the

patient is positioned accurately for panoramic radiography as dimensional distortion

may occur depending on the position within the focal trough and angulation of

the jaw. these positioning variations lead to changes in magnification15 along with

distortion, which may vary considerably at differing points along the dental arch. As

far as this is concerned, it is fortunate that vertical measurements are affected much

less than those in the horizontal plane. As a guide, during radiography it may be useful

to employ reference objects, such as ball bearings in a baseplate in the line of the arch,

as close to the proposed implant site as possible. At the early stage of edentulous

patient assessment, leaving acrylic dentures in place will allow more accurate

positioning of the patient.



7.2.4 Lateral cephalometric radiography

this may be of some use in the anterior jaw regions because it gives a cross-sectional

image of the mid-line of the maxilla and mandible. the view gives some information

on the trabecular density of the bone and the potential inclination of any proposed

implants in the region concerned; however, it is of very little use elsewhere in

either jaw because right and left sides are superimposed. Care must be taken with

patient positioning in relation to the beam, in order to reduce positioning errors.16

Practitioners without access to a cephalographic facility might wish to consider a

transymphyseal view, which would give comparable information of the mandible

to the lateral cephalometric view.17



7.2.5 Conventional cross-sectional tomography

this technique requires equipment in which there is controlled movement of

the x-ray source and receptor around a fixed patient. there are two main types

available. the first, using modified panoramic equipment, has additional software

to allow cross-sectional images to be produced. this is relatively inexpensive but

can be time-consuming and is a demanding technique for the operator to perform

well; furthermore, variable magnification errors occur, similar to those that can be

produced during panoramic radiography. the second type is a more sophisticated

machine that produces cross-sectional images of known magnification perpendicular

to the line of the dental arches.



90 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) it should be noted that using such equipment for multiple sites may result in a

substantial exposure to radiation.18 When employing tomography, it is recommended

that an imaging stent, containing radiopaque reference markers, is used.



7.2.6 X-ray computed tomography (CT)

Ct scanning is an imaging modality that allows the clinician to acquire sectional

detail of the mandible and/or maxilla in a single procedure. A series of axial slices

are captured and processed by computer to construct cross-sectional images of the

jaws, often using dedicated dental software. the images may be made life-size, are

normally accurate within a range of ±1 mm, and can be reformatted to produce

images in other planes. An estimate of bone density in Hounsfield Units (HU) can be

made from Ct scans, and sophisticated software may be used to produce interactive

implant planning tools (see table 7.1 and table 7.3 overleaf).



it should be noted that identification of the inferior dental canal in the lower molar

region is not always possible on Ct sectional images.19 As the radiation exposure

from Ct may be considerable, the use of dose reduction techniques and limitation

of the target field is imperative. Due to the high radiation dose, it is not justifiable

to use Ct for repeated examinations in implant dentistry.



During Ct imaging, metallic objects – such as amalgam restorations – may

cause significant artefacts, which can lead to difficulties in interpretation. While

scanning times are fairly quick, any movement of the patient between successive

axial scans will lead to motion artefacts with possible inaccuracies in shape and

size of the image.



7.2.7 Cone beam computed tomography

the use of cone beam computed tomography (CBCt) has progressed rapidly in the

last few years and offers a much reduced exposure to radiation, the production

of images of similar quality to medical Ct and a much lower capital investment

in the purchase of the equipment. For radiation-based sectional imaging, CBCt

is becoming established as the modality of choice. CBCt is established in many

dental practices for implant planning and in combination with stereolithic



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 91

Table 7.3: Recommended x-ray cross–sectional imaging modalities for

implant dentistry



Limited-volume Full-volume X-ray Ct cone beam Ct cone beam Ct

mAxiLLA – Single tooth

a. Incisive canal X

b. Shape of X

maxillary sinus

c. Clinical doubt on X

shape of alveolar

ridge

mAxiLLA – Dentate

a. Shape of X (for limited region X (for multiple X (for multiple regions

maxillary sinus of interest) regions) and having no access

to CBCt)

b. Clinical doubt on X (for limited region X (for multiple X (for multiple regions

shape of alveolar of interest) regions) and having no access ridge to CBCt)

mAxiLLA – Edentulous

a. Shape of X X (for multiple regions

maxillary sinus and having no access

to CBCt)

b. Clinical doubt on X X (for multiple regions

shape of alveolar and having no access ridge to CBCt)

mAnDiBLE – Single tooth

a. Clinical doubt on X

position of

mandibular

canal or mental

foramen

b. Clinical doubt on X

shape of alveolar

ridge



ConTinuED...



92 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

Table 7.3 (continued)



Limited-volume Full-volume X-ray Ct cone beam Ct cone beam Ct

mAnDiBLE – Dentate

a. Clinical doubt X (for limited region X (for multiple X (for multiple regions

on position of of interest) regions) and having no access mandibular to CBCt) canal or mental

foramen

b. Clinical doubt on X (for limited region X (for multiple X (for multiple regions

shape of alveolar of interest) regions) and having no access ridge to CBCt)

mAnDiBLE – Edentulous

a. Severe resorption X X (for multiple regions

and having no access

to CBCt)

b. Clinical doubt on X X (for multiple regions

shape of alveolar and having no access ridge to CBCt)

c. Clinical doubt X X (for multiple regions

on position of and having no access mandibular to CBCt) canal if posterior

implants are to

be placed



surgical guides and prefabricated prostheses in a similar manner to established

medical Ct systems.20



As the name suggests, CBCt builds up a three-dimensional image from a

dataset acquired from a cone beam projection.21 Radiation exposure from CBCt

is almost always less than from conventional Ct and in some cases may be 2–3 times

the exposure of a panoramic radiograph, but this may vary considerably in different

machines.22 Dental CBCt units are usually smaller than standard Ct scanners, and

the jaws are imaged in a single scan rotation. the machines use either an image

intensifier or a flat panel detector for image capture. CBCt images may either be

viewed on the workstation, or be exported to various post-processing software



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 93 packages to allow interactive implant planning. Most manufacturers have an export

function, allowing the data to be sent out to referring dentists with a simple imaging

program.



there are two basic types of CBCt scanners: limited and full-volume CBCt.

Limited-volume CBCt images a small volume (typically a few centimetres in diameter)

which would be of use for single or adjacent implant sites. While many potential

implant sites may be imaged by limited-volume CBCt, the cumulative dose effect

should be appreciated when multiple sites are imaged. For more complex cases,

where multiple implants are being placed in different regions of the mouth, a full-

volume acquisition would be preferable. Many full-volume scanners have the ability

to acquire limited-volume images, reducing their radiation dose further. As full-

volume CBCt images often include the skull base, these scans need to be viewed by a

suitably qualified radiologist to exclude the presence of any unexpected lesions. While

the dimensional accuracy of CBCt is comparable with Ct,23 other investigations such

as measurement of bone density in Hounsfield Units are not reproducible24 (see table

7.1 and 7.3).



As with all radiological examinations, a justification for the exposure must be made

by the operator, and the exposure should be reduced by limiting the field of view

and maximising other exposure-reducing factors, while still producing a diagnostic

image.10,11



Referring dentists should also be aware of their responsibilities to radiation exposure

and full training should be given to staff operating CBCt machines to ensure that they

are capable of initiating dose reduction strategies.



7.2.8 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)

MRi is a sectional tomographic imaging modality that does not use ionising radiation,

but it is not widely used in implant dentistry. Direct cross-sectional views of the

jaws may be made in any plane and with a high degree of accuracy,2, 25 comparable

to those obtained with Ct26 (see table 7.1). the anatomy is best shown using t1-

weighted sequences. normal restorative materials are unlikely to produce significant



94 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) artefacts on MRi scans. However, ferromagnetic objects, such as orthodontic brackets

and temporary crown posts, can cause severe distortion. As image acquisition times

may be longer than for other modalities, a good fast spin echo sequence design is

recommended.



7.3 CHoiCE oF tECHniqUES

An initial radiographic examination of a proposed implant site, using periapical films

or panoramic radiographs, is essential to exclude the presence of any retained root

or other abnormality which might require preliminary surgery or contra-indicate

implant placement. they must be used in the light of each patient’s individual

needs. Ct is associated with considerable dose implications that need to be clinically

justified. Cross-sectional tomography will give a lower radiation exposure when used

in single sites, while MRi creates no exposure to ionising radiation. Finally, the choice

of imaging modality may be limited by the availability of facilities and the costs

involved (see table 7.1).



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 95 7.4 REFEREnCES

1. Frederiksen nL. Diagnostic imaging in dental implantology. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral

endod 1995;80:540–54.

2. Gray CF, redpath tW, Smith FW, Staff rt. Advanced imaging: magnetic resonance imaging in

implant dentistry. Clin oral Implants res 2003;14:18–27.

3. Albrektsson t, Zarb GA, Worthington P, eriksson Ar. the long-term efficacy of currently used dental

implants: a review and proposed criteria for success. Int J oral Maxillofac Implants 1986;1:11–25. 4. Harris D et al. eAo guidelines for the use of diagnostic imaging in implant dentistry. A consensus

workshop organized by the european Association for osseointegration in trinity College Dublin.

Clin oral Implants res 2002;13:566–70.

5. Harris D et al. eAo guidelines for the use of diagnostic imaging in implant dentistry 2011. A

consensus workshop organized by the european Association for osseointegration at the Medical

University of Warsaw. Clin oral Implants res 2012;23:1243-53.

6. Horner K, Islam M, Flygare L, tsiklakis K, Whaites e. Basic principles for use of dental cone beam

computed tomography: consensus guidelines of the european Academy of Dental and Maxillofacial

radiology. Dentomaxillofacial radiology. 2009;38: 187–95.

7. [r] european Commission. radiation Protection 172. Cone beam Ct for dental and maxillofacial

radiology: evidence based guidelines. Luxembourg: european Commission; 2012. Available at:

https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/172.pdf . Accessed: January 2018. 8. Lekholm U, Zarb GA. Patient selection and preparation. In: Branemark P-I, Zarb G, Albrektsson t, editors.

tissue integrated prostheses. osseointegration in clinical dentistry. Berlin: Quintessence; 1985. 9. Palmer rM, Howe LC, Palmer PJ. A clinical guide to implants in dentistry, 2nd ed. London: British

Dental Association; 2008.

10. Gratt BM, Shetty V. Implant radiology. In: Goaz PW, White SC, editors. oral radiology. Principles and

Interpretation. St Louis: Mosby; 1994.

11. Whaites e. essentials of dental radiography and radiology, 4th ed. edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone;

2007.

12. Guerrero Me, Jacobs r, Loubele M, Schutyser F, Suetens P, van Steenberghe D. State of the art

on cone beam Ct imaging for preoperative planning of implant placement. Clin oral Investig

2006;10:1–7.

13. Sherrard JF, roussouw Pe, Benson BW, Carrillo r, Buschang PH. Accuracy and reliability of tooth

and root lengths measured on cone-beam computed tomographs. Am J orthod Dentofacial orthop

2010;137(4 suppl):S100-8.

14. Vasquez L, Saulacic n, Belser U, Bernard JP. efficacy of panoramic radiographs in the preoperative

planning of posterior mandibular implants: a prospective clinical study of 1527 consecutively

treated patients. Clin oral Implants res 2008:19:81–5.

15. Bolin A, eliasson, von Beetzen M, Jansson L. radiographic examination of mandibular posterior

implant sites: correlation between panoramic and tomographic determinations. Clin oral Implants

1996;7:354–359.

16. Verhoeven JW, Cune SC. oblique lateral cephalometric radiographs of the mandible in

implantology: usefulness and accuracy of the technique in height measurements of mandibular

bone in vivo. Clin oral Implants 2000;11:39–43.

17. Shelley A, Horner K. A transymphyseal x-ray projection to assess the anterior edentulous mandible

prior to implant placement. Dental Update 2008;35:689–694.



96 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

18. Dula K, Mini r, Lambrecht Jt, van der Stelt PF, Schneeberger P, Clemens G, et al. Hypothetical



mortality risk associated with spiral tomography of the maxilla and mandible prior to endosseous

implant treatment. eur J oral Sci 1997;105:123–9.

19. Imamura H, Sato H, Matsuura t, Ishikawa M, Zeze r. A comparative study of computed tomography

and magnetic resonace imaging for the detection of mandibular canals and cross sectional areas in

diagnosis prior to dental implant treatment. Clin Implant Dent relat res 2004;6:75–81. 20. Vercruyssen M, Jacobs r, Van Assche n, van Steenberghe D. the use of Ct scan based planning for

oral rehabilitation by means of implants and its transfer to the surgical field: a critical review on

accuracy. J oral rehab 2008:35:454–74.

21. Arai Y, tammisalo e, Iwai K, Hashimoto K, Shinoda K. Development of a compact computed

tomographic apparatus for dental use. Dentomaxillofac radiol 1999 28: 245–248. 22. Ludlow JB. Comparative dosimetry of dental CBCt devices and 64-slice Ct for oral and maxillofacial

radiology. oral Surg oral Med oral Pathol oral radiol endod 2008;106:106–14 23. Hashimoto K, Kawashima S, Araki M, Sawada K, Akiyama Y. Comparison of image performance

between cone-beam computed tomography for dental use and four-row multidetector helical Ct. J

oral Sci 2006;48:27–34

24. Bryant A, Drage n, richmond S. Study of the scan uniformity from an i-CAtcone beam computed

tomography dental imaging system. Dentomaxillofac radiol 2008;37:365–374. 25. nasel CJ, Pretterklieber M, Gahleitner A, Czerny C, Breitenseher M, Imhof H. osteometry of the

mandible performed using dental Mr imaging. Am J neuroradiol. 1999;20:1221–7. 26. Aguiar MF, Marques AP, Carvalho AC, Cavalcanti MG. Accuracy of magnetic resonance imaging

compared with computed tomography for implant planning. Clin oral Implant res 2008;19:362–5.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 97

98 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



8 i M A G i n G S t R A t E G y F o R t H E A D U L t P A t i E n t



8.1 intRoDUCtion

Ann Shearer and Andrew Shelley



this section draws on the evidence presented in other sections in formulating

an imaging strategy for the adult patient. For details of the evidence behind these

recommendations, the reader should refer to the appropriate sections.



the prescription of radiographs should always be based on a thorough history and

oral examination. the routine use of x-rays based on a generalised approach rather

than individual prescription is unacceptable.



in order to plan treatment for the adult patient, the practitioner will require

information. in the dentate patient, this may include:

• Presence of caries.

• Condition of existing restorations.

• Alveolar bone levels.

• Root morphology.

• Morphology of pulp chamber.

• Signs of periapical pathology.

• Position of unerupted teeth or retained roots.

• other pathology of the jaws.



Additionally, where dental implants are planned, this may include:

• Form and quality of the edentulous ridge and underlying bone.

• Boundaries of relevant anatomical features.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 99 notwithstanding, radiographic examination should only be carried out where the

results will potentially affect patient management. Where management is known

in advance to be the same with or without a radiographic examination, such

examination cannot be justified.



8.2 tHE nEW ADULt PAtiEnt

A flow diagram incorporating radiographic selection criteria, suitable for the adult

new patient, is shown in Figure 8.1. this flow diagram is a guide and clinical

judgement should be used. For example, a patient with few remaining teeth and

severe alveolar bone loss may not need any radiographs in order to plan treatment.



8.2.1 Panoramic radiography

A panoramic view may sometimes be useful in the presence of extensive gross oral

disease and concurrent oral surgical or orthodontic problems. the limitations of the

panoramic view should be taken into consideration, and supplementary intraoral

views may be necessary to show appropriate detail (Section 2.2).



there are other indications for panoramic radiography; for example, in some oral

surgical situations. these are discussed in Section 2.2. nonetheless, it is stressed that

routine screening with panoramic radiography cannot be justified.



8.2.2 Cone beam computed tomography (CBCT)

CBCt technology holds promise for the future of dental imaging. the presently available

evidence does not support the routine prescription of CBCt imaging in the diagnosis

of dental caries, periodontal disease or in endodontic therapy. in particular, caution

is required because beam-hardening artefacts on CBCt from metallic restorations will

produce artefactual “caries”. nevertheless, where CBCt images are already available, care

should be taken to check for dental caries, alveolar bone levels and periapical disease.



the use of CBCt in endodontics is the subject of active research, and there is some

evidence that it has a useful role in diagnosis where conventional radiography fails

to provide adequate diagnostic information (see Section 6.7).



100 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Figure 8.1



1. A judgement should be made of the fewest radiographs required to appropriately demonstrate alveolar

bone levels and dental caries. this will be a combination of periapical radiographs, horizontal bitewing radiographs and vertical bitewing radiographs. For the detection of posterior approximal caries, a horizontal or vertical bitewing view should be selected because of the optimal geometry offered by bitewing radiography.

2. Depending on time since root canal treatment was completed and availability of previous radiographs.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 101 Where dental implants are planned, CBCt may be appropriate to visualise available

bone volume and adjacent anatomical structures1 (see Section 7).



C the presently available evidence does not support the routine prescription of CBCt imaging in the diagnosis of dental caries or periodontal disease, or in endodontic therapy.



8.3 SPECiFiC CLiniCAL SitUAtionS

8.3.1 Extraction of teeth

Where there are existing radiographs, these should be referred to before extraction

of teeth. there is no convincing evidence to support the need for routine radiography

prior to extractions in adults. nevertheless, in some selected cases, a pre-extraction

radiograph would be judicious.2



these are:

• A history of previous difficult extractions.

• A clinical suspicion of unusual anatomy.

• A medical history placing the patient at special risk if complications were

encountered.

• Prior to orthodontic extractions.

• Extraction of teeth or roots that are impacted, buried or likely to have a close

relationship to important anatomical structures.



With the exception of third molars, the appropriate radiograph will normally be

a periapical view.



102 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

C there is no convincing evidence to support the need for routine radiography prior to extractions in adults.



8.3.2 Heavily restored teeth

Apical periodontitis can develop in heavily restored, crowned or endodontically

treated teeth. For example, in a meta-analysis of 28,881 endodontically treated

teeth, Pak et al found that 36% had periapical radiolucencies.3 Similarly, Saunders

and Saunders found that 19% of all non-root-filled, crowned teeth had evidence of

periapical periodontitis.4 Brooks and Cho found a significant association between

the depth of restorations and periapical pathology.5



Apical periodontitis can arise without any symptoms. this raises the question

of which teeth should be radiographed to screen for the presence of periapical

periodontitis and how often. Kirkevang and Wenzel carried out a study of 1199

adults to identify the best predictors to assist the decision whether to take additional

radiographic images to detect apical periodontitis.6 the strongest predictor was the

presence of root fillings. Another important predictor was the presence of three or

more inadequate coronal restorations in the mouth. nevertheless, apical periodontitis

can also develop in teeth with well-placed restorations.



Until further evidence emerges, it seems prudent, for the new adult patient, to

select periapical views for all teeth which are root-filled, or heavily restored, with

either direct or indirect restorations. Where direct restorations have been placed, the

definition of “heavily restored” must remain a matter of judgement. the frequency

of follow-up radiographs of such teeth will also be a judgement based on clinical

circumstances, signs and symptoms.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 103

C it is prudent, for the new adult patient, to select periapical views for all teeth which are root-filled, or heavily restored, with either direct or indirect restorations.



8.3.3 Toothwear

there is a concern that aggressive toothwear may overwhelm the reactive processes

of the dental pulp, leading to necrosis and periapical periodontitis. this may suggest

that new adult patients with severe toothwear should be screened using periapical

radiography. nevertheless, Rees et al found that 99% of teeth with severe toothwear did

not have apical pathology.7 the authors suggest that the slow process of toothwear allows

the defence mechanisms of the pulp to counteract the effects of wear, and they question

the necessity of taking routine radiographs of teeth with wear into dentine. it is therefore

recommended that only those teeth with extreme toothwear are investigated further

with periapical radiography, unless worn teeth fall into one of the other categories in

Figure 8.1 such as presence of symptoms or signs. Periodic follow-up radiographs of teeth

with extreme toothwear are unnecessary except in the presence of signs or symptoms.



C For the new adult patient, only those teeth with extreme toothwear should be further investigated with periapical radiography.



8.3.4 Radiographs for the estimation of endodontic working length

Reliable electronic apex locators have replaced the need for radiographs to determine

working length in many cases. Where there is doubt about the reliability of the

electronic measurement, then a radiograph should be taken with an endodontic file

in place to make an assessment of the working length. A check radiograph of a master

gutta percha point, seated in the root canal, may also be used (Section 6.4).



104 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

C Where there is doubt about the reliability of electronic measurement, then a radiograph should be taken with an endodontic file in place to make an assessment of the working length.



8.4 LonG-tERM REviEW AnD MAintEnAnCE

8.4.1 Periodontal

the decision to take further radiographs for the purpose of assessing changes in

periodontal support over time should be on a case-by-case basis. Radiographs should

be secondary to the clinical examination and should be taken when they have the

potential to change patient management (see Section 5).



8.4.2 Caries

the prescription of periodic bitewing radiography should be based on a caries risk

assessment. For those adults designated as being at high caries risk, bitewing

radiographs should be taken every six months and, for those at moderate risk,

annually until no new lesions or active lesions are apparent and the patient has

entered another risk category. For those at low risk, bitewing radiographs should be

taken at approximately two-year intervals. More extended radiographic recall intervals

may be employed if there is explicit evidence of continuing low caries risk.



in the absence of clinical indications to re-assess alveolar bone levels, horizontal

rather than vertical bitewing radiographs will be the view of choice.



Consideration should be given to alternative methods of caries diagnosis, such

as fibreoptic transillumination, described in Section 4.5.3. nevertheless, most are

presently regarded only as adjunctive. Some, such as laser fluorescence, have been

shown to have poor specificity. Until further evidence emerges, these should not

replace radiographic methods.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 105 8.4.3 Endodontic follow-up radiographs

A radiograph (or radiographs) should be taken immediately following obturation. A one-

year follow-up is recommended to assess healing even for asymptomatic teeth. if there

is incomplete healing, a further annual follow-up is recommended until healing occurs.

Large periapical radiolucencies should be monitored more frequently. teeth that remain

symptomatic may require additional radiographic review to assess the treatment options

(see Section 6).



8.4.4 Dental implants

the purpose of routine radiography following dental implant placement is to

monitor marginal bone levels and the success of osseointegration. For follow-up

of single dental implants, periapical views should normally be selected. in cases

of multiple dental implants, multiple periapical views or a panoramic view may

be appropriate. A judgement should be made based on the detail required and

the dose implications. Where marginal bone levels of posterior implants are visible

on periodic bitewing radiography, and there are no other concerns, this may reduce

the need for further views.



Radiography immediately after implant placement is only recommended where

there is doubt about the position of the implant in relation to adjacent anatomical

structures, or where there are unexpected complications during surgery which

warrant radiographic examination. in the immediate post-surgical period, a

radiograph may be justified if there are unexpected signs or symptoms.



A baseline radiographic record is required so that this can be compared with

future views. it is recommended that this be taken at the time of completion

of the prosthodontic phase of treatment. views are recommended after a further

12 months. Radiographs may then be taken at intervals of up to five years.



Additional or more frequent radiographic examination may be required if there

are signs or symptoms, or if there is marginal bone loss in excess of what is expected.

only in rare cases, where there are signs or symptoms, will a three-dimensional view

will be appropriate (see Section 7).



106 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 8.5 REFEREnCES

1. Harris D et al. eAo guidelines for the use of diagnostic imaging in implant dentistry 2011. A

consensus workshop organized by the european Association for osseointegration at the Medical

University of Warsaw. Clin oral Implants res 2012;23:1243-53.

2. Dental Protection. the whole tooth – and nothing but the tooth! Dental news 1999;20:7-8. 3. Pak JG, Fayazi S, White Sn. Prevalence of periapical radiolucency and root canal treatment: A

systematic review of cross-sectional studies. Journal of endodontics 2012;38:1170–1176. 4. Saunders WP, Saunders eM. Prevalence of periradicular periodontitis associated with crowned teeth

in an adult Scottish subpopulation. Br Dent J 1998; 185:137–140. 5. Brooks SL, Cho SY. Validation of a specific selection criterion for dental periapical radiography. oral

Surg oral Med oral Pathol 1993;75:383–386.

6. Kirkevang LL, Wenzel A. risk indicators for apical periodontitis. Community Dent oral epidemiol

2003;31:59–67.

7. rees JS, thomas M, naik P. A prospective study of the prevalence of periapical pathology in

severely worn teeth. Dental Update 2011;38:24–26, 28–29.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 107

108 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)



9 G o o D P R A C t i C E



9.1 Do’S AnD Don’tS

Ken Eaton and Andy Toy



9.1.1 Do

BEFoRE tAKinG A RADioGRAPH

in all cases:

• Complete a thorough history and examination, including the tooth-bearing areas.

• Seek originals or copies of radiographs taken elsewhere if they are relevant. All

nHS hospitals now store all patient images (including radiographs) in the Picture

Archiving and Communications System (PACS) which enables them to transmit

radiographs electronically to other nHS providers. this source should therefore be

considered.



FoR CARiES DiAGnoSiS

• Carry out a thorough clinical examination of clean, dry teeth prior to taking a

radiograph (this may include transillumination, flossing, temporary separation of

the teeth) and classify individual patients by caries risk category (see Appendix 2.)

• Reassess caries risk status regularly (not only in children but also elderly and

medicated patients; see Appendix 2.)



WHEn tAKinG A FiLM-BASED RADioGRAPH

• Use the appropriate radiograph for treatment planning.

• Use F-speed film for intraoral examinations and rare earth screens with spectrally

matched film with an effective speed of 400 for extraoral examinations.

• if using wet film, consider using double-pack radiographs if referral is likely.

• Report radiographic findings in patient’s notes.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 109 WHEn tAKinG A DiGitAL RADioGRAPH

• Use the appropriate radiograph for treatment planning.

• Use rectangular collimation.

• Use suitable monitors for viewing digital radiographs, under optimum conditions

and after adjustment of brightness and contrast settings.

• Ensure that phosphor plates or sensors are in good physical condition before use.



FoR ALL RADioGRAPHS

• Ensure that processing conditions are satisfactory before processing a film.

• Ensure regular quality assurance in film processing or digital image production

(eg. condition of plates and sensors, performance of sensors and plate readers).

• Use receptor-positioning and beam-aiming devices for intraoral films.

• Use an appropriate light box and magnifier for viewing, masking out any

extraneous light.

• Mount, label and store radiographs appropriately.

• Follow national recommendations.1

• Use exposure settings (kv, mA, time) chosen according to the imaging system

used which will deliver acceptable diagnostic quality images with minimum

patient dose.

• Send relevant existing radiographs when referring patients to colleagues.



9.1.2 Don’t

• Carry out ‘screening’ radiographs or take radiographs as ‘routine’.

• take a new radiograph without examining existing radiographs.

• take panoramic radiographs for all patients.

• Use a single protocol for all patients.

• Use an inappropriate light source for viewing.



110 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 9.2 iDEAS FoR AUDit – DEvELoPinG LoCAL GUiDELinES

Clinical audit is a statutory requirement1 as well as a useful tool to help you improve

your practice or simply check whether or not all members of the dental team meet

the expected standards. it can be used for almost any procedure and is required as

part of clinical governance for radiographs.



9.2.1 An audit to measure the quality of radiographs compared with NRPB guidelines

(outcome audit)

the nRPB guidance describes three grades of radiograph quality based on the

clinical value of the image. in essence, can one diagnose disease effectively from

the radiograph? they assign the grades as excellent, diagnostically acceptable and

unacceptable (table 9.1).



Table 9.1: quality assessment of radiographs



ratings Quality criteria targets: percentage of

radiographs taken

1 excellent – no errors of exposure, not less than 70%

positioning or processing

2 Diagnostically acceptable – some not greater than 20%

errors of exposure, positioning or

processing, but which do not detract

from the diagnostic utility of the

radiograph

3 Unacceptable – errors of exposure, not greater than 10%

positioning or processing which

render the radiograph diagnostically

unacceptable



the focus of the audit is simply whether or not the patient is gaining maximum

benefit from the radiation exposure. it is still necessary to record why the radiograph

does not meet the required standard, as before. A sufficient number of radiographs

to provide a representative sample are also required. Again, it is a good idea to record



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 111 who was involved in making the exposure as well as the processing, so that good

and poor performance can be identified.



9.2.2 Setting a standard

Firstly, you need to decide what standard you would like to achieve, along with a target

and exceptions. the standard may be described in terms of an outcome, process or

structure. outcome means the end result you are looking for (such as: “over 70% of

our radiographs will be grade 1, except in patients with a strong gag reflex”). Process

relates to how you expect the patient to be cared for (such as: “95% of our patients will

have justification, grade and reporting recorded on the computer or handwritten notes

during the visit, except when the server has crashed”). Structure means the equipment

or physical facilities (such as: “all of our x-ray machines should be less than ten years

old, with the exception of the Ct scanner at our City premises, which will be replaced

after refurbishment”) (see table 9.2).



Table 9.2: Summary of outcome, process and structure standards, targets and

exceptions



outcome Process Structure

Standard Grade 1 – no Justification, X-ray machines

errors of patient grading and <10yrs old preparation, reporting should exposure, be noted in the positioning, computerised processing or records on the day receptor handling of the patient’s visit

target >70% >95% of records

have all three

aspects noted

exception Patients with a Days when the Ct scanner at

strong gag reflex practice server is City premises

down



112 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 9.2.3 Involving all team members

ideally, setting standards is a team effort. this helps to ensure that the whole team

“buy in” to the changes that may be necessary. A preliminary discussion between

team members responsible for these activities also makes everyone aware of the

standards that the practice owners wish to achieve. this is often the most important

aspect of any audit and can spontaneously lead to improvements in practice.



Some aspects of radiography best practice have already been established and can

be found in resources such as the Guidance Notes for Dental Practitioners on the Safe Use

of X-Ray Equipment,2 the Health Protection Agency’s Guidance on the Safe Use of Dental

Cone Beam CT Equipment3 and advice published by the British Dental Association (BDA).

Manufacturers’ instructions can also be useful. Guidelines for good practice can then

be drawn up and displayed in clinical areas as a reminder.



Setting the target for reaching the standard is the next aspect to consider. A 100%

success rate in all aspects of dental radiography is ideal but highly unlikely. A lower

target that will still provide a high standard of image whilst minimising radiation

exposure is more realistic. Public Health England (PHE) has already recommended

target for radiographs of >70% grade 1 and <10% grade 3. this allows for those

difficult patients who gag, have missing teeth, etc. However, when it comes to stock

control, you may feel it reasonable to expect that 100% of your radiographs are

in date and stored correctly. When setting a standard, it is important to make a

reasonable judgement, otherwise the team will not respect the audit process and

are less likely to make the improvements you are looking for.



9.2.4 Gathering data

Most audits in dentistry are of outcome or process. information needed to compare

performance with standards can either be drawn from clinical records of patients

seen in the past (an audit of retrospective data), or collected from patients from a

given date onward (an audit of prospective data). Using retrospective data relies on

good record-keeping during the period you are auditing. you should also ensure

that the records relate to a time when you were practising in a similar way to your

current practice. otherwise you will only know how good you were with your old



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 113 technique, and will not learn much about your present technique. An audit of your

x-ray grades of, say, six months ago would be useless if you had changed from film-

based to digital x-rays in the last month.



All types of radiograph taken in a practice, which may include panoramic,

cephalometric and CBCt images, as well as small intraorals, should be audited, even

if the numbers taken are low. Using prospective data allows you to make observations

that may not normally be recorded in the notes. you also need to be aware that you

or your team may have an improved performance because you know you are being

audited (known as the Hawthorne Effect). As audit is used to improve performance,

then it can be argued that the desired effect has been achieved. it is also likely that

team members will want to stick to the standard when they know what it is. the good

thing about prospective audits is that everyone in the team has a good idea of what

standard you want to meet and you know that your data is up to date.



Retrospective data can usually be gathered more quickly than prospective data, where

you have to wait for enough of the right sort of cases to come into the practice.



CoLLECtinG DAtA

Data is collected on a data capture form. it is worth taking a little time to think

about this aspect of the process. A well-designed form will enable to you to gather

the right sort of data to compare how you are doing against your standard. it also

needs to collect data to tell you why you are not meeting your standard. if you do

not know why you are failing then you will not be able to improve. So, if you are

getting a high number of grade 2 radiographs, is it because the positioning

is wrong, or is it the processing or storage that is at fault? Having this level of data

will allow you to identify where you need to make your changes and which team

members need to be involved.



A data capture form needs a list of the criteria for the radiograph you are looking at, along

with a comments box to record why it failed to meet your standard. it is also important

to include details such as the names of the operator, processor or filing assistant, if you

want to target your action plan to the individuals who are failing to meet the standard.



114 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) the next stage is to decide how to sample the radiography service in your practice.

if you are performing a prospective audit, then it could be the next 50 bitewings

or periapicals taken by the practice. However, it may be better to look at a sample

of 20 for each operator. it is important to have a sampling protocol that provides

a reasonable amount of data to provide a realistic impression of the practitioner’s

performance. However, it is not a good idea to choose such a large number that

the data will take many months to collect.



in a retrospective audit, the data can be gathered much more quickly, but it has to be

from a period when the procedures and techniques used are the same as those of the

present day. it is also important to realise that audit is not research, and so will never

provide statistically sound results. there is no need to create an audit to provide

data that can stand up to statistical analysis. the purpose of audit is to encourage

an improvement in standards. For this reason, it is better to have a short, sharp

data gathering period where everyone remains engaged in the process, than a

long drawn-out study.



9.2.5 Comparing standards

the next stage of the audit is to look at your current practice and record either what

you are achieving (outcomes), doing (process) or have in place (structure). then you

can compare yourself against your standard and see if there are any ways you could

improve. if the data capture form has been carefully designed, then a dental care

professional (DCP) can often gather the data very easily. this involves them in the

process and gives them a sense of ownership of any changes required.



once the data has been collected, then it is compared with the standard set at the

beginning. if you have designed your data capture form carefully, it should be obvious

which aspects of the process and which team members are meeting the standard,

and which are not. ideally, the results and analysis are presented to the team. Care

must be taken if there is underperformance to report. this is often better provided

in private to the individual, with the results anonymised for the team meeting.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 115 9.2.6 Formulating an action plan

the formulation of an action plan is the natural progression from the analysis. this

may take the form of extra training (where an operator keeps missing the apex, for

instance), producing a written set of instructions (when the team are not clear exactly

how to label and file correctly), purchasing new equipment (if the developer keeps

breaking down), or a host of other actions. if there are changes required, create

an action plan with detailed steps, a finish date for each step and a named person

responsible for overseeing it.



you will also need to evaluate if the plan has been successful, which is normally best

done by a re-audit. the re-audit date should be set at a time that has allowed all of

the changes to become embedded in the practice. the re-audit should occur very

promptly for issues that are carry a high health and safety risk, or could lead

to a significant loss of service (a high business risk).



if you have achieved your goal, you may consider increasing the target or be content

that you are practising to a very high level. in any event, you will need to set a re-

audit date to ensure your practice is maintaining its high level of performance (a

maintenance audit). this is a low-risk scenario, so a maintenance audit can be set

several months or even years in the future.



Details are given here for two different approaches to a radiography audit. the first

is about making good use of the resources in your practice, and ensuring that staff

follow best practice when taking, developing, storing and labelling radiographs (a

process audit). the second makes use of the former national Radiological Protection

Board (nRPB, now part of PHE) guidelines for radiograph quality (an outcome audit).



9.2.7 Audits involving teamwork in dental radiography (process audit)

it is good clinical governance to aim for a consistently high standard of dental

radiographs to ensure that maximum clinical value is obtained from the image,

whilst radiation exposure is kept to a minimum for both patients and staff.



116 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Much of the focus in dental radiography training is on the correct technique.

However, it is no good taking a superb radiograph with perfect positioning and

exposure if it is processed poorly, mis-labelled or mis-filed. this will mean that the

radiograph will need to be repeated, unnecessarily raising the radiation exposure

for the patient and using up time in the practice. therefore, the whole team has a

part to play in ensuring that there is a high standard of clinical governance in dental

radiography.



Poor processing and storage could also have medico-legal consequences. Radiographs

must be kept for 11 years or until the patient is 25 years of age, whichever is the

longest (the counsel of perfection would be to retain records indefinitely).



Good radiograph record-keeping also includes appropriate justification, grading

and reporting on the clinical notes.



Understanding the requirement for teamwork in the whole process of clinical

governance for radiographs opens up many opportunities for auditing the quality

of your practice’s radiographs.



Here are some suggestions for some simple audits to help improve the quality

of your radiographs:

• Stock control of unused radiographs: is stock out of date? is it stored correctly?

• Processing: Were they developed, washed and dried correctly? is there a

programme for changing the developer fluids before they lose their potency?

is equipment maintained?

• Mounting, labelling, and filing: Was it done correctly and in time for the patient’s

next appointment?

• Record-keeping: is there a record of the justification for the radiograph? Has the

grade been recorded? is there a report of the clinical findings?

• Checking equipment: visually inspect and record the condition of phosphor

plates or digital sensors and all other parts of the equipment.



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 117 the above four bullet points apply to wet radiographs. the bullet points about

labelling (clear identification) and record-keeping also apply to digital radiographs.



Some practices grade their radiographs as soon as they are processed (usually by

a DCP), providing an ongoing series of data. this can be very useful if the person

grading the radiographs has been trained adequately. However, anecdotal evidence

suggests that the DCP will often give every radiograph a grade of 1, even when they

are of very poor quality. the practice will then appear to have a spectacular level

of performance. Any regulator that discovers an inadequate grading process could

become rightly suspicious that the practice owner is not taking their responsibilities

of clinical governance seriously. this may lead them to delve a little deeper into other

aspects of the practice’s health and safety procedures.



it should also be noted that merely collecting grades without stopping to collate and

analyse the data is not really audit, either. Any good clinical governance system will

do this at regular intervals and have a record of the team meeting and any necessary

action plan.



quality assessment of cone beam computed tomography (CBCt) examinations

has been addressed by the Health Protection Agency Working Party.3 in view of the

potential radiation dose implications of this technique and the more reliable image

capture, a more stringent performance target has been set. it recommended that

no more than 5% of examinations should be graded as diagnostically unacceptable.

no “excellent” grading was included because the presence of metallic restorations

inevitably leads to artefacts in CBCt. this resulted in a target of not less than 95% of

examinations being rated as diagnostically acceptable. Users of CBCt are strongly

advised to refer to this document for further details.3



118 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 9.3 MoRE AUDit iDEAS

An initial audit may highlight areas worth investigating in more detail, or may

show up other problems not considered first time around. the focus of each re-audit

can easily be tailored to meet the needs of the practice at the time. Some areas

to consider are:

• Darkroom facilities.

• Radiographic image quality.

• Routine surveillance of equipment.

• Record-keeping of routine events and accidents.

• Daily evaluation of processing equipment using a test object.

• Weekly checks on the number of radiographs taken.

• Protection for staff, and monitoring.

• Weekly checks on radiographic workload.

• Factors not listed above specific to digital radiographs.



Recommendations have been published2 for assessing quality of radiographs

using a three-point scale (table 9.1). these lend themselves to audit, and data

analysis is kept simple. A more detailed look at reasons for poor quality could

then be reviewed with re-audit.



Recommended further Reading

British Dental Association (BDA). BDA Advice – Radiation Protection.

october 2017. Available at www.bda.org (Members Area).



Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) 119 9.4 REFEREnCES

1. Department of Health. the Ionising radiation (Medical exposure) regulations 2017. London:

Department of Health; 2017.

2. national radiological Protection Board (nrPB). Guidance notes for dental practitioners on the safe

use of x-ray equipment. nrPB: Chilton; 2001.

3. Health Protection Agency. Guidance on the safe use of dental cone beam Ct. London: HPA; 2010.



120 Selection Criteria for Dental Radiography Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

Appendix 1



Overview of



recommendations



Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Appendix 1

RefeRences

1. [R] Beal Jf. social factors and preventive dentistry. In: Murray JJ, editor. The prevention of oral



Appendix 2 disease. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1996. p.216-233. 2. smith P, nugent Z, Pitts nB. The burden of delay in seeking dental treatment in the scottish GDs [abstract 395]. J Dent Res 1996;75:1179.

3. Gustaffson Be, Quensel ce, Lanke Ls, Lundqvist c, Grahnen H, Bonow Be, et al. The Vipeholm

dental caries study; the effect of different levels of carbohydrate intake on caries activity in 436

individuals observed for five years. Acta Odontol scand 1954;11:232-364.

4. [R] shou L. social and behavioural aspects of caries prediction. In: Johnson nW, editor. Dental



Selection criteria caries: Markers of High and Low Risk Groups and Individuals. cambridge: cambridge University Press; 1991. p.172-97. 5. [R] Tenovuo J. salivary parameters of relevance for assessing caries activity in individuals and populations. community Dent Oral epidemiol 1997;25:82-6.



for radiographs 6. [R] Hobson P. sugar-based medicines and dental disease. community Dent Health 1985;2:57-62. 7. [R] Rugg-Gunn AJ. Diet and dental caries. In: Murray JJ, editor. The prevention of oral disease. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1996. p.3-31.



according to caries 8. [R] Murray JJ, naylor Mn. fluorides and dental caries. In: Murray JJ, editor. The Prevention of Oral

Disease. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1996. p.32-77.

9. [R] Koch G, Arneberg P, Thylstrup A. Oral hygiene and dental caries. In: Thylstrup A, fejerskov O,

editors. Textbook of clinical cariology, 2nd ed. copenhagen: Munksgaard. 1994: p.219-30.



risk status 10. [R] sutcliffe P. Oral cleanliness and dental caries. In: Murray JJ, editor. The Prevention of Oral Disease. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1996. p.68-77. 11. [R] Hausen H. caries prediction – state of the art. community Dent Oral epidemiol 1997;25:87-96.

12. [R] Johnson nW, editor. Dental caries: markers of high and low risk groups and individuals.

cambridge: cambridge University Press, 1991.

13. [R] Gordon PH, nunn JH. fissure sealants. In: Murray JJ, editor. The prevention of oral disease.

Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1996. p.78-94.

14. Zachrisson BU, Zachrisson s. caries incidence and orthodontic treatment with fixed appliances.

scand J Dent Res 1971;79:183-92.

15. Zachrisson BU, Zachrisson s. caries incidence and oral hygiene during orthodontic treatment.

scand J Dent Res 1971;79:394-401.

16. Yamaga T, Komoda Y, soga K, Ono M, Asada T, Itosaka n, et al. Root surface caries of denture

wearers in middle aged and elderly people. J Osaka Univ sch Dent 1994;34:65-71.

17. Drake cW, Beck JD. The oral status of elderly removable partial denture wearers. J Oral Rehabil

1993;20:53-60.



Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Appendix 2

Appendix 3





Care pathways -



a framework for



decision support



and audit





Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK) Appendix 3





O t h e r s t a n d a r d s a n d g u i d a n c e

p u b l i c a t i O n s f r O m t h e f g d p ( u K )



Antimicrobial Prescribing for General Dental Practitioners



Antimicrobial Prescribing for General Dental Practitioners provides guidance on the

prescribing of antimicrobials to adults and children in primary dental care. It gives clear,

simple and practical advice on when to prescribe, what to prescribe, for how long and

at what dosage. An invaluable asset in any dentist’s library, the current edition reflects

changes to recommendations since the previous (2006) update, and includes dosage recommendations

for children for the first time.

• Available in hard copy format, e-book format, and free-of-charge online.



Clinical Examination and Record-Keeping: Good Practice Guidelines

Covering dental records, history-taking, full examination, recall visits, consent,

confidentiality, data protection, referrals, electronic records, special situations and more,

this third edition of Clinical Examination and Record-Keeping has been fully updated

and expanded to reflect technological and regulatory developments, and introduces

a simple ‘ABC’ system for grading its recommendations. The hard copy also includes scenarios to

put the guidance into context, as well as a series of extensive appendices, diagrams, charting notes

and template forms which dental professionals may adopt for use in their practice.

• Available in hard copy format and free-of-charge online.



Dementia-Friendly Dentistry: Good Practice Guidelines

With the number of people living with dementia rising primary care dental teams are

encouraged to consider ways they can improve support and care for this patient group.

Dementia-Friendly Dentistry: Good Practice Guidelines offers clear, evidence-based and practical

information and recommendations categorised using the Faculty’s ‘ABC’ grading system.

• Available in hard copy format (and free-of-charge online from mid-2018).



Standards in Dentistry



Standards in Dentistry brings together all previous standards and guidelines in



oral healthcare, including material published by the FGDP(UK), BDA, GDC, ISO,



and the Department of Health, among others. The comprehensive manual includes

tables of clinical outcomes, based on the FGDP(UK)’s previous publication Self-Assessment Manual

and Standards (SAMS), covering 17 treatment areas in both primary and secondary care dentistry.

This ambitious package is an indispensable compendium for the conscientious oral healthcare

professional in helping to guide personal or practice-based quality assessment.

• Available in hard copy format with accompanying online access for purchasers.



All available at www.fgdp.org.uk





Selection Criteria





for Dental Radiography



Faculty of General Dental Practice (UK)

35-43 Lincoln’s Inn Fields

London WC2A 3PE

Tel: 020 7869 6754 Fax: 020 7869 6765

Email: fgdp@fgdp.org.uk Website: www.fgdp.org.uk

Registered Charity No. 212808





