                                    Scottish Dental  SDcep
         Clinical Effectiveness Programme

         Emergency Dental Care
              Dental Clinical Guidance

Is    t
bl

Do
ha

Giv
 app

         November 2007
                           Scottish Dental  SDcep
Clinical Effectiveness Programme

The Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme (SDCEP) is an
initiative of the National Dental Advisory Committee (NDAC) and is
supported by the Scottish Government and NHS Education for Scotland.
The Programme aims to provide user-friendly, evidence-based guidance
for the dental profession in Scotland.

SDCEP guidance is designed to help the dental team provide improved
care for patients by bringing together, in a structured manner, the best
available information that is relevant to priority areas in dentistry, and
presenting this information in a form that can be interpreted easily and
implemented.

`Supporting the dental team to provide quality patient care'
                           Scottish Dental  SDcep
Clinical Effectiveness Programme

Emergency Dental Care
     Dental Clinical Guidance

November 2007
© Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme
ISBN 978 1 905829 04 0
First published November 2007

Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme
Dundee Dental Education Centre, Frankland Building, Small's Wynd, Dundee DD1 4HN

Email scottishdental.cep@nes.scot.nhs.uk

Tel  01382 425751 / 425771

Website www.scottishdental.org/cep
                                                                                 Emergency Dental Care

Emergency Dental Care

1 Introduction                                                                   1

1.1         Scope of this Guidance                                               2

1.2         Statement of Intent                                                  3

2 Emergency Care in Practice                                                     4

2.1         Main Elements of a Patient Pathway to Emergency Dental Care          4

2.1.1       Emergency Care                                                       5

2.1.2       Urgent Care                                                          6

2.1.3       Advice, Self Help and Routine Care                                   7

2.2         Prioritising Commonly Presenting Dental Emergencies in Primary Care  8

2.3         Providing Self-help Advice on Commonly Presenting Emergency

            Dental Conditions                                                    9

2.3.1       Providing Advice on Managing Dental Pain                             9

2.3.2       Providing Advice on Managing Dental Trauma Prior to Dental Assessment 11

2.3.3       Providing Advice on Managing Post-extraction Bleeding                12

3 The Organisation of Emergency Dental Services                                  13

3.1         NHS Board Areas                                                      13

3.2         Regional and National                                                13

3.3         Out-of-hours Emergency Dental Standards                              14

STANDARD 1 ~ Accessibility and Availability at First Point of Contact            15

STANDARD 2 ~ Safe and Effective Care                                             16

STANDARD 3 ~ Audit, Monitoring and Reporting                                     18

4 Clinical Governance, CPD and Training                                          19

5 Recommendations for Audit and Research                                         20

5.1         Recommendations for Audit                                            20

5.2         Recommendations for Research                                         20

Appendix 1 Guidance Development                                                  21

The Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme                             21

The Guidance Development Group                                                   22

The Programme Development Team                                                   22

Guidance Development Methodology                                                 23

Reviewing and Updating                                                           23

Steering Group                                                                   24

References                                                                       25

Emergency Dental Care Overview

                                                                                                        iii
Emergency Dental Care
iv
                Emergency Dental Care

1 Introduction

All dentists must ensure that patients for whom they have accepted responsibility have access to
emergency dental care both during and outside normal working hours and that their patients are
made aware of this and how it is achieved1,2. However, throughout Scotland and the UK there
is great variation in the availability and consistency of advice and care for patients with a dental
emergency3,4. Individual practices will often have policies to deal with emergency patients who
present during the working day, either based upon fitting patients into the appointment system or
allocating time specifically for emergency patients within the appointment system. Out-of-hours care
is sometimes provided through a shared service offered to the patients of a group of participating
practices, although there has been an increasing trend towards managing calls centrally on a larger,
regional basis using decision-support software systems5.

In Scotland, NHS 24 works in partnership with local NHS Boards to provide a confidential telephone
health advice and information service throughout the country. A survey of calls received between
1 January 2005 and 30 June 2005 was undertaken by NHS 24. Out of a total of 654,475 calls, 2%
related to patients reporting dental problems (the vast majority of these relating to `toothache', `jaw
pain' and `swelling'). 48% of dental calls were received on Friday, Saturday or Sunday, with peaks of
activity at around 6 pm on weekday evenings and on Saturday and Sunday mornings (Figure 1). On
Saturday mornings, calls reporting dental problems represented a significant proportion of the total
NHS 24 call volume.

                                    Daily Calls per Time Band 1/1/05 ­ 30/6/05

                          Figure 1: Dental call volume reported by NHS 24 by day and time

 Within healthcare generally, care that cannot be foreseen or planned in advance of contact with the relevant
  healthcare professional is referred to as `unscheduled care'. However, traditionally within dental services
  and among the general public, `emergency dental care' and `dental emergency' are broad terms used in
  connection with unscheduled care for dental problems. Consequently, these terms are used within this
  guidance. In addition, `Emergency Care' is used to describe the relatively rare outcome of dental triage
  when a patient is assessed as requiring immediate treatment.

                                                                                                                                                 1
Emergency Dental Care

           1 Introduction

                    Many of the calls received by NHS 24 are from patients who are not registered with an NHS
                    dentist. In Scotland, more than half of the adult population and a third of children are currently
                    not registered6. The provision of advice and care for unregistered patients differs markedly across
                    the country3. General dental practices may offer treatment to unregistered emergency patients but
                    are not obliged to do so. As an alternative, treatment might be available at dental access centres
                    run by the community or salaried general dental services. The fragmented nature of emergency
                    dental services and dissatisfaction with the accessibility and variability of emergency dental care are
                    likely to contribute to a low expectation of the service among patients, particularly outside normal
                    working hours . 4,7,8 This is compounded by a general lack of clarity among the public about what
                    actually constitutes a dental emergency. In some cases, a visit to the dentist might not be necessary
                    if reassurance and advice is available to the patient7. In other cases, the postponement of immediate
                    care out of hours to a guaranteed appointment on the following day is perfectly acceptable to
                    patients and might present a more cost-effective approach5. However, to date there have been no
                    nationally agreed standards for emergency dental care.

                    The diverse manner in which emergency dental care is provided at a local level across the country
                    will persist unless these issues are addressed. Therefore, the Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness
                    Programme (SDCEP) convened a Guidance Development Group to provide guidance on the provision
                    of emergency dental care in Scotland. This guidance is of relevance to both primary dental care
                    providers and those responsible for organising services, and aims to improve patient safety by
                    promoting a consistent standard of care of patients with a dental emergency. Further details about
                    SDCEP and the development of this guidance are provided in Appendix 1.

                 1.1 Scope of this Guidance

                    This guidance aims to facilitate improvements in the care of patients with dental emergencies by
                    promoting more equitable provision of emergency dental care throughout Scotland for all patients,
                    irrespective of the time of day that their dental emergency arises or whether or not they are currently
                    registered with a dentist.

                    The systematic approach presented within this guidance focuses on the patient journey and can be
                    applied within a variety of local circumstances. It does not constitute a formal clinical care pathway
                    as clinical decision-making was not within the remit of the Guidance Development Group. However,
                    a simple method for prioritising dental emergencies in primary care practice and specific self-help
                    advice for dental staff to provide to patients are included. These are also provided as a separate
                    `Practice Guide' for use in practice. Quality standards that specify the requirements of out-of-hours
                    emergency dental services are presented for use by NHS Boards and all dentists. A diagram providing
                    an overview of the guidance is provided at the end of this document.

                    This guidance is directed towards all those who have a role in delivering dental care, including
                    general dental practitioners, dental nurses, receptionists, and staff within the salaried, community
                    and hospital dental services. It is also considered to be relevant to those responsible for organising
                    emergency dental service provision at a local or regional level, dental policymakers in NHS Boards

2
                Emergency Dental Care

1 Introduction

and at a national level. The guidance applies to all patients, including adults, children and those with
special needs, irrespective of whether they are currently registered with a dentist or not.

In preparing the guidance, few studies were found that investigated the provision of unscheduled
or emergency dental care services. As research evidence to inform the development of the guidance
was limited, the process of development has been based largely on expert opinion (see Appendix 1
Guidance Development).

1.2 Statement of Intent

This guidance has resulted from a careful consideration of current legislation, professional regulations,
the available evidence and expert opinion. The Guidance Development Group recommends that the
entire document be adopted as standard practice when planning or undertaking the care of patients
with dental emergencies and in planning the delivery of emergency dental services. As guidance, it
does not override the individual responsibility of the health professional to make decisions appropriate
to the individual patient. However, it is advised that significant departures from this guidance are fully
documented and that this documentation is included in the record of advice given to all patients who
contact dental services in an emergency.

                                                                                                            3
Emergency Dental Care

           2 Emergency Care in Practice

   This section of the guidance is aimed primarily at dental staff directly involved in responding to
   emergency calls within the practice setting. Information in Sections 2.2 and 2.3 is also provided as a
   separate `Practice Guide' for use in daily dental practice.

   2.1 Main Elements of a Patient Pathway to Emergency Dental Care

   In 2003 the Scottish Executive Health Department issued guidance on emergency dental care that
   identified three categories of need: dental emergencies; urgent dental conditions; and routine dental
   problems9. Based on these three categories of need, a simple pathway to providers of care for patients
   who contact the service with a dental emergency is presented below.

   The initial patient contact is typically by telephone. The term triage describes the process of sorting
   patients into groups based on their need for or likely benefit from immediate treatment. Telephone
   triage is an important element in the handling of emergency contacts. Not only can it identify those
   patients who are the highest priority but the telephone contact itself provides an opportunity to
   reassure the patient and give advice5,7,10. The triage of large volumes of emergency telephone
   contacts requires detailed algorithms and decision-support software packages such as those used
   by NHS 24. The details of these are beyond the remit of this guidance. However, as dental practices
   need to conduct a basic form of triage on a daily basis in response to telephone calls from patients
   requesting emergency appointments, a simple method for use by primary dental care staff is given
   in Section 2.2.

   Following the initial patient contact:

       Record patient details.
       Triage to one of three care categories depending on the assessed need of the patient, as shown
       in the diagram below (for details, see Sections 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 2.1.3).

                                                     Patient with Dental
                                                           Emergency

                                                       Initial Telephone
                                                     Contact and Triage

   Emergency Care    Urgent Care         Advice, Self Help
      Section 2.1.1  Section 2.1.2       and Routine Care

                                             Section 2.1.3

4
                              Emergency Dental Care

2 Emergency Care in Practice

2.1.1 Emergency Care

Approximately 1% of `emergency' telephone calls are likely to fall into the `Emergency Care'
category.

Category of Need: Dental Emergencies

Conditions include:
          · Trauma including facial/oral laceration and/or dentoalveolar injuries (e.g. avulsion of
             a permanent tooth)
          · Oro-facial swelling that is significant and worsening
          · Post-extraction bleeding that the patient is not able to control with local measures
          · Dental conditions that have resulted in acute systemic illness or raised temperature
             as a result of dental infection
          · Severe trismus
          · Oro-dental conditions that are likely to exacerbate systemic medical conditions
             (e.g. diabetes)

Provider:
          · During normal working hours: dental practice where registered, dental access centre
             or other local access clinic
          · Out-of-hours: evening or weekend dental access clinic or through another agreed
             local provider (e.g. Oral and Maxillofacial on-call staff)

Timescale:
    Provide contact with a clinician within 60 minutes and subsequent treatment within a timescale
    that is appropriate to the severity of the condition.

                                                                                                     5
Emergency Dental Care

           2 Emergency Care in Practice

                 2.1.2 Urgent Care

                     Approximately 75% of `emergency' telephone calls are likely to fall into the `Urgent Care' category.
                     Category of Need: Urgent Dental Conditions
                     Conditions include:

                               · Dental and soft-tissue infections without a systemic effect
                               · Severe dental and facial pain: that is, pain that cannot be controlled by the patient

                                  following self-help advice (see Section 2.3.1)
                               · Fractured teeth or tooth with pulpal exposure
                     Provider:
                               · During normal working hours: dental practice where registered, dental access centre

                                  or other local access clinic
                               · Out-of-hours: evening or weekend dental access clinic
                     Timescale:
                         Provide self-help advice and treat patient within 24 hours.
                         Advise patient to call back if their condition deteriorates.

6
                              Emergency Dental Care

2 Emergency Care in Practice

2.1.3 Advice, Self Help and Routine Care

Approximately 25% of `emergency' telephone calls are likely to fall into the `Advice, Self Help and
Routine Care' category.

Category of Need: Routine Dental Problems

Conditions include:
          · Mild or moderate pain: that is, pain not associated with an Urgent Care condition
             and that responds to pain-relief measures
              - Refer to Section 2.3.1 for guidance on providing advice to patients
          · Minor dental trauma
              - Refer to Section 2.3.2 for guidance on providing advice to patients
          · Post-extraction bleeding that the patient is able to control using self-help measures
              - Refer to Section 2.3.3 for guidance on providing advice to patients
          · Loose or displaced crowns, bridges or veneers
          · Fractured or loose-fitting dentures and other appliances
          · Fractured posts
          · Fractured, loose or displaced fillings
          · Treatments normally associated with routine dental care
          · Bleeding gums

Provider:
          · Patient self help and, for dental treatment, dental practice where registered or
             dental access centre or other local access centre

Timescale:
    Provide self-help advice. Provide access to an appropriate service within 7 days if required.
    Advise patient to call back if their condition deteriorates.

                                                                                                     7
Emergency Dental Care

           2 Emergency Care in Practice

   2.2 Prioritising Commonly Presenting Dental Emergencies in
           Primary Care

   The following diagram illustrates a simple method for prioritising emergency calls from patients for
   use by dental staff in the practice setting. Note that this is not comprehensive but deals with the most
   common presenting conditions.

                           Is there swelling?

                           YES                     NO

   Does swelling restrict                                    1 Is patient in pain?
   swallowing or extend                                                  or

         to the eye?                                   2 Has patient suffered trauma
                                                                  to the teeth?
   YES         NO                                                        or

                                                       3 Is there bleeding following
                                                                 an extraction?

               Provide self-help                       YES           NO
                   advice on
                 pain relief if
                    required

                                    Provide self-help advice on
                                     pain relief (Section 2.3.1)

                                                    or
                                   dental trauma (Section 2.3.2)

                                                    or
                                      post-extraction bleeding

                                            (Section 2.3.3)
                                  as appropriate to the condition

                                  If severe pain,        If avulsed  If mild or
                                 avulsed primary        permanent    moderate
                                 tooth or dentine
                                                         tooth or     pain or
                                    exposed by         uncontrolled    minor
                                       trauma                          dental
                                                         bleeding     trauma
                           Provide
                           URGENT                                      Provide
                                                                      ROUTINE
                             Care
                                                                         Care
      Provide
   EMERGENCY

        Care

8
                              Emergency Dental Care

2 Emergency Care in Practice

2.3 Providing Self-help Advice on Commonly Presenting
        Emergency Dental Conditions

Although guidance on clinical decision-making is not within the remit of this document, there is
frequently a need for practice staff to advise patients on how to manage their symptoms prior to
seeing a dentist. Sections 2.3.1 to 2.3.3 therefore provide guidance on managing a range of common
emergency conditions for which self help might be beneficial to the patient.

2.3.1 Providing Advice on Managing Dental Pain

The delivery of advice on managing dental pain requires suitable training.

Context
Patients who are waiting for dental appointments might require basic advice on the effective
management of their dental pain.

    Give the patient the following advice on the use of self-help measures, including ibuprofen
    and/or paracetamol to relieve pain.

          · Avoid stimuli that precipitate or worsen the pain such as hot or cold foods or cold
             air.

          · Holding cooled water or crushed ice around the tooth can help some types of dental
             pain.

          · Severe pain from the mouth or teeth sometimes feels worse when lying flat;
             therefore, try lying propped up as this might ease the pain.

          · Use painkillers that have successfully provided pain relief for you in the past without
             adverse effects. For moderate or severe pain refer to dosage advice overleaf.

          · Avoid taking aspirin as a painkiller if there is bleeding.
    Ensure patients are reminded to follow the directions on the packet for advice on precautions in
    some medical conditions. For example, patients with asthma should avoid ibuprofen.
    Advise the patient to call back if the advice provided proves inadequate.

                                                                                                      9
Emergency Dental Care

           2 Emergency Care in Practice

                    Analgesic advice ­ to be given only after establishing that the following painkillers have
                    been used successfully by the patient in the past.
                    Detailed dosage advice can be given only by a suitably qualified health professional.
                    The following analgesic dosage options can be recommended for patients with no contraindications.

                               · For moderate pain of dental origin in adults11, either:
                                   - ibuprofen, 1 x 400 mg tablets 4­6 hourly,
                                     or
                                   - paracetamol, 2 x 500 mg tablets 4­6 hourly.
                                     No more than 3 x 400 mg ibuprofen or 8 x 500 mg paracetamol tablets in a
                                     24-hour period.

                               · For pain of dental origin in children, either:
                                   - ibuprofen (100 mg/5 ml oral suspension), 50­200 mg (depending on age) three
                                      times daily,
                                     or
                                   - paracetamol (120 mg/5 ml or 250 mg/5 ml oral suspension), 60­500 mg
                                      (depending on age) four times daily.
                                     Follow the instructions on the bottle.

                               · For severe pain of dental origin in adults, either:
                                   - ibuprofen and paracetamol alternately (e.g. ibuprofen 400 mg followed 2 hours
                                      later by paracetamol 2 x 500 mg and so on without exceeding the recommended
                                      daily dose or frequency for either drug),
                                     or
                                   - ibuprofen, 2 x 400 mg tablets 8 hourly, up to a maximum of 2.4 g in a 24-hour
                                      period.

10
                              Emergency Dental Care

2 Emergency Care in Practice

2.3.2 Providing Advice on Managing Dental Trauma Prior to Dental
        Assessment

Context

Depending on the nature of the injury, patients who have experienced trauma to their mouth might
require Urgent or Emergency dental attention. Dental trauma exposing the dentine requires an
urgent appointment with a dentist. For an avulsed permanent tooth, prior to seeing a dentist, advice
on handling and storage of the tooth to preserve the cells of the periodontal ligament might be
required.

    Provide advice on the management of pain and post-extraction bleeding as described in Sections
    2.3.1 and 2.3.3, if required.

    For broken or fractured teeth, determine whether dentine has been exposed by asking
    the patient if they are in pain or are sensitive to heat or cold. If they are, arrange an Urgent
    appointment with a dentist to help avoid pulpal infection.

    If dentine has not been exposed, advise the patient that this does not require Emergency care but
    that a routine appointment might be necessary to restore aesthetics or to remove sharp edges.

    For avulsed permanent teeth, it might be possible to replant the tooth if this can be carried
    out soon after avulsion, ideally within 30 minutes. Arrange for the patient to see a dentist as an
    Emergency case as soon as possible. Advise the patient to handle the tooth by the crown only, to
    avoid touching the root and to store the tooth moist, preferably in fresh or long-life milk.

    For avulsed primary teeth, advise the patient that the tooth should not be replanted and
    arrange an Urgent appointment to assess potential trauma to the developing permanent teeth.
    Give advice on pain management (Section 2.3.1).

                                                                                                        11
Emergency Dental Care

           2 Emergency Care in Practice

                 2.3.3 Providing Advice on Managing Post-extraction Bleeding

                    Context
                    Patients who have had extractions during the past week might require basic advice on the
                    management of bleeding from the extraction area.

                         Ascertain that no anticoagulant medication is currently being taken.
                         Give the patient the following advice on the use of self-help measures to stop the bleeding.

                               · Blood-stained saliva is normal after dental extractions.
                               · Make a small pad with a clean cotton handkerchief or kitchen towel and dampen it

                                 slightly with water.
                               · Rinse the mouth once only with warm (not hot) water to get rid of the blood.
                               · Place the damp pad over the socket area and bite firmly. If there are no opposing

                                 teeth hold the pad firmly on the socket. Maintain this while sitting upright quietly
                                 for 20 minutes and then check. Repeat once if necessary.
                               · After the bleeding has stopped, remain rested and as upright as possible.
                               · Do not drink alcohol.
                               · Do not disturb the blood clot in the socket.
                         Advise the patient to re-contact the service if these self-help measures prove inadequate.

12
                                                                                                                Emergency Dental Care

3 The Organisation of Emergency
      Dental Services

This section of the guidance describes the national organisation of emergency dental services
and includes standards for the provision of out-of-hours services. It is directed primarily at those
responsible for organising emergency dental services at a national, regional or local level, but is also
of relevance to all dentists.

3.1 NHS Board Areas

Primary dental care providers have continuing contractual obligations to ensure that appropriate care
is provided for their registered patients who have a dental emergency1. NHS Boards are responsible
and accountable for planning and delivering dental services to their local populations (including
emergency and out-of-hours dental services) and for providing information on accessing dental
services, particularly when care is required urgently6.

Guidance and successive tranches of funding from the Scottish Executive9 have resulted in the
development of a variety of arrangements for the provision of out-of-hours emergency dental care
across Scotland3. However, in contrast to out-of-hours primary care medical services, to date there
have been no agreed standards for out-of-hours emergency dental services. Therefore, standards for
out-of-hours primary emergency dental services are presented in this guidance (Section 3.3).

Although the standards include all patient groups, each Board area should have specific arrangements to
address the particular needs of patients in the following categories who have a dental emergency:

          · Children with dental trauma, including clear pathways into local child protection
             procedures (for detailed advice refer to `Child Protection and the Dental Team'12,13)

          · Medically compromised patients
          · Patients who are hospitalised
          · Patients with specific access problems (e.g. homeless, ethnic minority, sensory

             impairment)
          · Patients in remote and rural locations
          · Patients who require domiciliary care
          · Patients with orthodontic appliance problems

3.2 Regional and National

The development of a national infra-structure for out-of-hours emergency dental services is being
coordinated by a Scottish Emergency Dental Services (SEDS) Board, working with NHS 24.

The model that has emerged from this work is that:

          · NHS 24 will provide the initial telephone call handling for all patients with a dental
             emergency;
                                                                                                                                                  13
Emergency Dental Care

           3 The Organisation of Emergency
                 Dental Services

                               · calls will be triaged by an appropriately trained dental nurse, with those patients who
                                 require Emergency or Urgent care being directed into local services at a regional or
                                 NHS Board level within the recommended timescales (see Section 2).

                    Adoption of this model should ensure a high degree of consistency across NHS Board areas for all
                    patients (regardless of registration status) and the development of robust local services to provide
                    subsequent care. It is proposed that primary care practitioners who opt in to the national emergency
                    dental service in order to provide out-of-hours cover for their practice patients will commit to
                    participating in a local emergency dental service staffing rota. Participation in the national emergency
                    dental service should enable practitioners to meet the Out-of-hours Emergency Dental Standards
                    presented in Section 3.3.
                    The current status of the implementation of the national emergency dental service will be made
                    available via the Scottish Dental internet portal www.scottishdental.org.

                 3.3 Out-of-hours Emergency Dental Standards

                    The following standards for the provision of emergency out-of-hours dental care are based on a draft
                    prepared by the Consultants in Dental Public Health Audit Group. They have been adapted from the
                    standards for out-of-hours primary care medical services published by NHS Quality Improvement
                    Scotland (NHS QIS) in August 2004, entitled `The Provision of Safe and Effective Medical Services
                    Out-of-Hours'14.
                    After publication of the medical standards, NHS QIS conducted follow-up visits to NHS Boards and
                    published a national overview of these services in October 200615. A similar process is recommended
                    for the out-of-hours emergency dental service standards and a national assessment tool is being
                    developed to enable a comprehensive assessment of compliance after the Scottish Emergency Dental
                    Service is fully rolled out. It is recommended that all primary dental care providers participate in this
                    national service in conjunction with their local NHS Boards.
                    These standards apply to out-of-hours emergency dental care; however, it is also the responsibility of
                    all primary care dental providers (including private providers) to ensure that registered patients who
                    present with dental emergencies during the working day are prioritised and offered care within the
                    recommended timescales (see Section 2).

14
                                                                                                                Emergency Dental Care

Out-of-hours Emergency Dental Standards

STANDARD 1 ~ Accessibility and Availability at First Point of
Contact

     Standard             Rationale                                  Criteria
    Statement
                   Oral health-related     1(a) 1. Arrangements are in place to identify the
1(a) Out-of-       problems happen         needs of those potentially using these services.
hours emergency    after dental practices
dental services*   have closed.            1(a) 2. Arrangements are in place to meet
are available                              the needs of those potentially using these
and accessible     In order to access      services.
to patients        care at all times,
(irrespective      patients and their      1(a) 3. Arrangements are in place for patients
of their dental    representatives need    or their representatives to access care by
registration       information regarding   telephone (in the first instance).
status).           the out-of-hours
                   primary care dental     1(a) 4. Following triage, patients receive advice
*`Out-of-hours'    services available in   and care from a suitably trained health
is defined in PCA  their area and access   professional, appropriate to the degree of
2003(D)189 as:     to these services       urgency of their condition.
                   when necessary.
weekdays                                   1(a) 5. Access to, and delivery of, services is not
5.30 pm to                                 compromised by physical (including medical
8.30 am,                                   conditions), language, cultural, social,
                                           economic or other barriers.
weekends from
5.30 pm Friday                             1(a) 6. Arrangements for access should be
to 8.30 am                                 integrated across all areas of dental out-of-hours
Monday.                                    care (general dental practice, community,
                                           salaried and hospital dental service), and, where
                                           appropriate, with other primary care
                                           emergency services.

                                           1(a) 7. Information on how to access the
                                           service should be available to all and not
                                           compromised by physical, language, cultural,
                                           social, economic or other barriers.

                                                                                                                                       15
Emergency Dental Care

           Out-of-hours Emergency Dental Standards

    STANDARD 2 ~ Safe and Effective Care

    2(a) Healthcare Governance

         Standard     Rationale                Criteria
        Statement
                      Involving patients in    Patient Focus
    2(a) The service  their care supports
    provider has a    their decision-          2(a) 1. Throughout the service, work is
    comprehensive,    making and there         undertaken in partnership with individuals,
    patient-focused   is good evidence         communities and community planning partners
    healthcare        that outcomes are        in the design, development and review of
    governance        improved. Safe and       services. The results of this work are acted upon
    programme         effective care can       and feedback is provided to all those involved.
    in place.         only be provided if:
                                               2(a) 2. Information is made available by the
                      · patient safety is at   provider for the patient and their representatives
                        the core of all care   regarding any care or treatment given.
                        and treatment, and
                        risks are identified,  Clinical Governance
                        managed and
                        minimised (clinical    2(a) 3. There are clear, cohesive plans across the
                        governance);           service that direct and support policy
                                               development and service delivery internally
                      · staff are competent,   and through delivery partners.
                        supported and have
                        ongoing training       2(a) 4. Service providers operate a system of risk
                        (staff governance).    management to ensure that risks are identified,
                                               assessed, controlled and minimised.
                      Healthcare
                      governance aims          2(a) 5. Board clinical governance committees
                      to put in place the      receive regular reports on out-of-hours
                      necessary clinical       emergency dental services.
                      staffing and corporate
                      infrastructure that      2(a) 6. Boards have systems in place to ensure
                      informs the              that all primary dental care providers have
                      identification of risks  satisfactory arrangements for the emergency
                      and supports the         care of their practice patients.
                      provision of safe and
                      effective care.          2(a) 7. Arrangements are in place to
                                               communicate, inform and cooperate with key
                                               professionals, external parties and voluntary
                                               agencies.

                                               2(a) 8. Systems are in place to ensure that
                                               secondary care dental providers have access
                                               arrangements for their patients with dental
                                               emergencies.

                                               Staff Governance

                                               2(a) 9. Staff involved in out-of-hours dental
                                               care meet employment requirements,
                                               including qualifications and training.

16
                                                         Emergency Dental Care

Out-of-hours Emergency Dental Standards

STANDARD 2 ~ Safe and Effective Care

2(b) Clinical Care

    Standard                Rationale                                    Criteria
    Statement
                     Effective patient care    2(b) 1. Procedures are in place to ensure quick
2(b) Clinical        cannot be provided        and easy access to evidence-based clinical
guidelines           without knowledge         guidelines to support clinical decision-making.
are readily          of, understanding
available to         of and access to          2(b) 2. Patients are assessed and responded to,
support clinical     information based on      based on clinical need and professional
decision-making      the best available        judgement.
and facilitate       evidence.
delivery of                                    2(b) 3. Emergency dental services have drugs
quality services                               that are in date, and equipment that is regularly
to patients.                                   maintained.

                                               2(b) 4. Emergency dental services have effective
                                               decontamination procedures in place.

                                               2(b) 5. Protocols are in place to address the
                                               needs of specific high-risk patient groups.

2(c) Information and Communication

Standard             Rationale                 Criteria
Statement

2(c) Information     Timely communication      2(c) 1. Systems are in place for the completion,
gathered during      of clear and              use, storage and retrieval of records including
care out of hours    appropriate               compliance with the Data Protection Act 1998.
is recorded          information to those
(on paper or         providing ongoing care    2(c) 2. Systems are in place for receiving and
electronically) and  is essential to ensure    communicating information to inform the
communicated         effective treatment       patient's ongoing care in a timely manner.
to the patient's     or follow up.
dentist in addition                            2(c) 3. Systems are in place to ensure that
to any other         It is important that a    patients are aware of, and agree to, the
professionals        range of processes        sharing of information about them and their
involved in the      such as technology,       care with other health professionals.
patient's ongoing    training and support
care when            services are in place to
appropriate.         allow effective transfer
                     of information.

                                                                                                  17
Emergency Dental Care

           Out-of-hours Emergency Dental Standards

    STANDARD 3 ~ Audit, Monitoring and Reporting

         Standard     Rationale               Criteria
        Statement
                      Monitoring of           3(a) 1. A set of key performance indicators
    3(a) A provider-  performance helps       (patient-focused public involvement, clinical
    specific quality  to identify and         and organisational) are in place.
    assurance         manage risks and
    framework is in   supports the continual  3(a) 2. Comments, complaints and
    place to support  improvement of care.    compliments are recorded, regularly reviewed
    routine audit,                            and action taken if appropriate.
    monitoring and    Competent handling
    reporting of      of comments and         3(a) 3. The service provider takes action to
    performance.      complaints can          identify patient views and satisfaction levels.
                      increase user
                      satisfaction and        3(a) 4. An annual report on performance and
                      facilitate changes in   services is available when requested
                      practice to improve     by those contracting services.
                      quality of care.

                      Reporting of
                      performance enables
                      providers to account
                      systematically for the
                      quality of services
                      they provide.

18
                                                                                                                 Emergency Dental Care

4 Clinical Governance, CPD and Training

It is a requirement of clinical governance and fundamental good clinical practice that all health
professionals work to monitor and constantly strive to improve the quality of care that they and their
teams provide to patients.
The quality of service provided to patients with an emergency is often subjected to particular scrutiny
by the patient or their relatives because of the acute pain that usually accompanies the dental
condition.
It is recommended that:

          · all those involved in providing the first point of patient contact (such as the dental
             receptionist and dental triage nurse) receive appropriate training and ongoing
             professional development, including specific instruction on the use of common
             analgesic preparations (Section 2.3.1);

          · all those involved in the delivery of emergency dental services regularly seek to
             audit their practice, and arrangements that are in place for emergency dental care
             are examined as part of the standard dental inspections of general dental practices
             and other primary care providers and reflect the good practice outlined in this
             guidance;

          · telephone triage services audit their performance on a regular basis and are subject
             to external review;

          · all providers of emergency dental care carry out significant event analysis (SEA)
             as appropriate; further information is available via NHS Education for Scotland
             (www.nes.scot.nhs.uk/dentistry/general/audit).

                                                                                                                                                  19
Emergency Dental Care

           5 Recommendations for Audit and
                 Research

                 5.1 Recommendations for Audit

                    Audit topics should be carefully chosen to provide information that will inform the future
                    development and improvement of services. Examples include:

                               · the appropriateness of the triage of patients accessing emergency dental care;
                               · the appropriateness of dental treatments provided to patients accessing emergency

                                 care;
                               · patient satisfaction with the emergency dental service they receive.

                 5.2 Recommendations for Research

                    There has been very limited research on the provision of emergency dental services. Areas to consider
                    for future research include:

                               · whether improving public awareness of available emergency dental services improves
                                 accessibility and appropriate use;

                               · the impact of service availability on out-of-hours demand;
                               · barriers to patient access to emergency dental care;
                               · evaluation of the dissemination and implementation of SDCEP `Emergency Dental

                                 Care' guidance.

20
                      Emergency Dental Care

Appendix 1

Guidance Development

The Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme

The Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme (SDCEP) is an initiative of the National Dental
Advisory Committee (NDAC) in partnership with NHS Education for Scotland.

The NDAC comprises representatives of all branches of the dental profession and acts in an advisory
capacity to the Chief Dental Officer. It considers issues that are of national importance in Scottish
dentistry and also provides feedback to other bodies within the Scottish Government on related,
relevant healthcare matters. Periodically, sub-groups of the NDAC have produced publications,
including `Emergency Dental Drugs', `Clinical Governance in Dental Primary Care' and `Dental Practice
Advisors in Scotland'.

To give a structured approach to providing clinical guidance for the dental profession, SDCEP was
established in 2004 under the direction of the NDAC. The primary aim of the programme is to
support dental teams throughout Scotland by providing guidance developed by the profession for
the profession on topics identified as priorities for dentistry in Scotland. SDCEP guidance is designed
to help the dental team provide improved care for patients by bringing together, in a structured
manner, the best available information that is relevant to priority areas in dentistry, and presenting
this information in a form that can be interpreted easily and implemented.

The increasing emphasis within healthcare on the adoption of an evidence-based approach
to clinical care and treatment, and changes in the regulatory framework of healthcare provision
present significant challenges for dental teams. To help meet these challenges, SDCEP is developing
guidance that takes a variety of forms to suit the diverse topics being addressed. Within many
areas of dentistry there is a lack of the type of high-quality scientific evidence that usually informs
the recommendations within conventional clinical guidelines. Despite this, there is some research
evidence and a wealth of expertise and specialist knowledge within dentistry upon which to draw in
order to make recommendations. In other areas, documentation, including legislation, policies and
guidelines, is not in a readily accessible format for dental teams. A key aim of the Programme is to
evaluate the best available information that is relevant to dentistry and to translate it into a form that
members of the dental profession will be able to interpret easily and implement.

The methodology used to develop SDCEP guidance mirrors that used to develop high-quality
guidelines. It aims to be transparent, systematic and to adhere as far as possible to international
standards set out by the Appraisal of Guidelines Research and Evaluation (AGREE) Collaboration
(www.agreecollaboration.org/).

SDCEP is funded by the Scottish Government Health Directorates, and through its collaboration with
NHS Education for Scotland contributes to the implementation of the Scottish Government's Dental
Action Plan, which aims to both modernise dental services and improve oral health in Scotland.

                                                                                                            21
Emergency Dental Care

           Appendix 1

              Guidance Development

    The Guidance Development Group

    A Guidance Development Group, comprising individuals from all branches of the dental profession
    that have a role in the provision of emergency dental care, was convened to develop and write this
    guidance.

    Mr Graham Ball        Consultant in Dental Public Health, NHS Fife
    (Chairman)
    Mrs Dawn Adams        Clinical Director of Community Dental Services, Fife
    Dr Robert Broadfoot   Dental Director Primary Care Division, NHS Greater Glasgow
    Mr Martin Donachie    Consultant in Restorative Dentistry, Maxillofacial Unit, Aberdeen Royal
                          Infirmary, Grampian Universities Hospital Trust, Aberdeen
    Mrs Helen Donaghy     General Dental Practice Manager, Glasgow
    Mr Douglas Duncan     Lead Clinician, Chalmers Dental Centre, NHS Lothian
    Dr Gail Topping       Director of the Dental Caries Control Programme, Dental Health Services
                          Research Unit and Honorary Consultant in Dental Public Health
    Mr Andy Yuill         General Dental Practitioner and Dental Practice Advisor, NHS Fife and
                          NHS Tayside

    The Programme Development Team

    The Guidance Development Group worked closely with the Programme Development Team, which
    provides project management and administrative support and is responsible for the methodology
    of guidance development. The team facilitates all aspects of guidance development by searching
    and appraising information and evidence, conducting research, liaising with external organisations,
    editing the guidance, and managing the publication and dissemination of guidance materials.

    Dr Jan Clarkson       Director
    Dr Douglas Stirling   Research Manager ­ Guidance and Programme Development
    Dr Gillian MacKenzie  Guidance Development Researcher ­ Developmental Editing
    Mrs Linda Young       Guidance Development Researcher ­ Evaluation of Implementation
    Mrs Jill Farnham      Administrator

22
                      Emergency Dental Care

Appendix 1

Guidance Development

Guidance Development Methodology

The guiding principle for developing guidance within the Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness
Programme (SDCEP) is to first source existing guidelines, policy documents, legislation or other
recommendations. Similarly, relevant systematic reviews are also identified initially. These documents
are appraised for their quality of development, evidence base and applicability to the remit of the
guidance under development. In the absence of these documents or when supplementary information
is required, published literature is searched and unpublished work is sought.

For this guidance, published studies were identified by searching Medline. All consultants in dental
public health in Scotland were contacted to identify any relevant unpublished work. Additional
material was supplied by members of the Guidance Development Group. Few studies were found
that investigated the provision of emergency dental services and so research evidence to inform the
development of the guidance was limited; therefore, the process of development was based largely
on expert opinion.

Consultation was conducted prior to peer review and publication. The consultation draft was
distributed to a range of individuals and organizations with an interest in the delivery of emergency
dental care. In addition, dentists in Scotland were invited to comment on the draft, which was
available on our website, www.scottishdental.org/cep, or on request. All comments received through
the consultation were considered by the Guidance Development Group and the guidance amended
accordingly prior to peer review. Further amendments were made in response to comments from
peer reviewers before publication.

A system for grading recommendations has been developed within SDCEP16. This draws in part
on the levels of evidence as defined by the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN)17.
As this guidance is concerned with the provision of emergency dental services rather than clinical
aspects of patient care, it was considered inappropriate to categorise individual recommendations in
this manner. Instead, the Guidance Development Group recommends that the entire document be
adopted as standard practice.

Further information about the methodology used to develop this guidance is available on the SDCEP
website: www.scottishdental.org/cep.

Declarations of interest are made by all contributors to SDCEP. Details are available on request.

Reviewing and Updating

A review of all aspects of the context of this guidance (regulations, legislation, trends in working
practices and evidence) will take place two years after publication and, if this has changed significantly,
the guidance will be updated accordingly.

                                                                                                                                                  23
Emergency Dental Care

           Appendix 1

              Guidance Development

    Steering Group

    The Steering Group oversees all the activities of the Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme
    and includes representatives of each guidance development group and the dental institutions in
    Scotland.

    Prof. Jeremy Bagg       Chairman of the National Dental Advisory Committee; Head of Glasgow
    (Chairman)              Dental School and Professor of Clinical Microbiology, University of
                            Glasgow

    Mr Graham Ball          Consultant in Dental Public Health, Fife

    Dr Jan Clarkson         Director, Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme; Programme
                            Director, Dental Health Services Research Unit, University of Dundee

    Dr Dafydd Evans         Senior Lecturer and Consultant in Paediatric Dentistry, Dundee Dental
                            Hospital and School, University of Dundee

    Prof. Richard Ibbetson  Director, Edinburgh Postgraduate Dental Institute, University of
                            Edinburgh

    Mrs Mary McCann         General Dental Practitioner, Glasgow; Deputy Chief Dental Officer until
                            June 2006

    Miss Alice Miller       General Dental Practitioner, Duns, Borders; VT Adviser, NHS Education
                            for Scotland

    Prof. Nigel Pitts       Director, Dental Health Services Research Unit, University of Dundee

    Mr Derek Richards       Specialist Advisor to the Programme Development Team; Consultant in
                            Dental Public Health, Forth Valley; Director of the Centre for Evidence-
                            Based Dentistry, Oxford

    Dr Nigel Robb           Senior Lecturer in Sedation in Relation to Dentistry, University of
                            Glasgow Dental School

    Prof. William Saunders Dean of the Dental School, University of Dundee

    Mr Alan Whittet         General Dental Practitioner, Longniddry; Dental Practice Advisor, NHS
                            Lothian

    Prof. David Wray        Professor of Oral Medicine, University of Glasgow Dental School

24
                                                                      Emergency Dental Care

References

1  The National Health Service (General Dental Services) (Scotland) Regulations 1996. The Stationery Office

   Limited (1996)

   (www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si1996/Uksi_19960177_en_10.htm)

2  National Standards for Dental Services. Scottish Executive (2006)

   (www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2006/12/13143754/0)

3  Audit of Emergency Dental Service Provision by NHS Trusts in Scotland. Consultants in Dental Public

   Health Audit Group (unpublished) (2004)

4  Anderson R, Thomas DW. Out-of-hours dental services: a survey of current provision in the United

   Kingdom. British Dental Journal (2000) 188: 269-274

5  Topping GV. Out-of-hours emergency dental services-evaluation of the first year of a pilot project in Fife.

   British Dental Journal (2005) 198: 193-197

6  An action plan for improving oral health and modernising NHS dental services in Scotland. Scottish

   Executive Health Department (2005)

   (www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2005/03/20871/54813)

7  Anderson R, Thomas DW, Phillips CJ. The effectiveness of out-of-hours dental services: II. patient

   satisfaction. British Dental Journal (2005) 198: 151-156

8  White S. Out-of-hours dental care in Oxfordshire, Masters of Public Health Thesis, University of

   Birmingham (2002)

9  Emergency Dental Care Services ­ Guidance and Funding NHS. PCA(D)(2003)18 Directorate of Service

   Policy & Planning, Scottish Executive Health Department (2003)

   (www.show.scot.nhs.uk/sehd/pca/PCA2003(D)18.pdf)

10 Horton M, Harris RV, Ireland RS. The development and use of a triage protocol for patients with dental
         problems contacting an out-of-hours general medical practitioner cooperative. Primary Dental Care
         (2001) 8: 93-97

11 Barden J, Edwards JE, McQuay HJ, Wiffen PJ, Moore RA. Relative efficacy of oral analgesics after third
         molar extraction. British Dental Journal (2004) 197: 407-411

12 Child Protection and the Dental Team: An Addendum for Scotland. University of Glasgow Dental Hospital
         and School and NHS Greater Glasgow (2006)
         (www.cpdt.org.uk/f_info/dload/addendumScot06.pdf)

13 Harris J, Sidebotham P, Welbury R. Child Protection and the Dental Team: an introduction to safeguarding
         children in dental practice. Committee of Postgraduate Dental Deans and Directors (COPDEND) (2006)
         (www.cpdt.org.uk/f_info/dload/CPDHT.pdf)

14 The Provision of Safe and Effective Primary Medical Services Out-of-Hours ­ Standards. NHS Quality
         Improvement Scotland (2004)
         (www.nhshealthquality.org/nhsqis/files/Out-of-hours%20(Aug%202004).pdf)

15 The Provision of Safe and Effective Primary Medical Services Out-of-Hours ­ National Overview. NHS
         Quality Improvement Scotland (2006)
         (www.nhshealthquality.org/nhsqis/3249.html)

16 Conscious Sedation in Dentistry: Dental Clinical Guidance. Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness
         Programme (2006)
         (www.scottishdental.org/cep/guidance/dentalsedation.htm)

17 SIGN 50: A Guideline Developer's Handbook. Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (2001;
         updated 2004)
         (www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/fulltext/50/index.html)

                                                                                                                25
Emergency Dental Care

           Notes

26
       Emergency Dental Care

Notes

                              27
Emergency Dental Care
28
Emergency Dental Care ­ Overview                                                                                                                              Emergency Dental Care

This diagram summarises the main elements of the                           Patient with                                      If dental practice is closed or
provision of care recommended within this guidance.                   Dental Emergency                                   outwith working hours, redirect all
Further details are provided within the main text of                                                                      calls to an agreed triage provider
the guidance.                                                        Initial telephone contact
                                                                  e.g. NHS 24 or Dental Practice
                                          Record patient details
                                                                               TRIAGE

              Emergency Care                                                       Urgent Care                                    Advice, Self Help and
                                                                                                                                         Routine Care
Condition:                                                        Condition:
TRAUMA ­ including facial/oral lacerations and/or                 DENTAL AND SOFT-TISSUE INFECTION ­ without a           Condition:
dentoalveolar injuries                                            systemic effect                                        MILD OR MODERATE DENTAL PAIN
                                                                                                                         · See Section 2.3.1
ORO-FACIAL SWELLING ­ that is significant and                     SEVERE DENTAL OR FACIAL PAIN ­ not controlled by
worsening                                                         following self-help advice                             DENTAL TRAUMA
                                                                                                                         · See Section 2.3.2
POST-EXTRACTION BLEEDING ­ not controlled by                      FRACTURED TEETH OR TOOTH WITH PULPAL
advice and self help                                              EXPOSURE                                               POST-EXTRACTION BLEEDING
                                                                                                                         · See Section 2.3.3
DENTAL CONDITIONS ­ resulting in acute systemic                   Provider:
illness or raised temperature as a result of dental               During normal working hours: dental practice           Provider:
infection                                                         where registered, dental access centre or other local  Patient self help and, if required, subsequent dental
                                                                  access clinic                                          appointment
SEVERE TRISMUS
                                                                  Out of hours: evening/weekend dental access clinic     Timescale:
MEDICAL CONDITION ­ oro-dental conditions that                                                                           Provide self-help advice. Provide access to an
are likely to exacerbate systemic medical conditions              Timescale:                                             appropriate service within 7 days if required. Advise
(e.g. diabetes)                                                   Provide self-help advice and treat patient within 24   patient to call back if their condition deteriorates.
                                                                  hours. Advise patient to call back if their condition
Provider:                                                         deteriorates.
During normal working hours: dental practice where
registered, dental access centre or other local access            Note: Routine dental problems that fall outwith the urgent and emergency categories include: mild or moderate dental
clinic                                                            pain not requiring intervention within 24 hours; loose or displaced crowns, bridges and veneers; fractured or loose-fitting
                                                                  appliances; fractured posts; and fractured, loose or displaced fillings. Access to an appropriate service provider (usually
Out of hours: usually through evening/weekend                     the dental practice where registered or local dental access clinic) should be available within 7 days if necessary.
dental access clinic or local OMFS unit (via on-call
staff) through an agreed pathway

Timescale:
Provide contact with a clinician within 60 minutes
and subsequent treatment within a timescale that is
appropriate to the severity of the condition.
The Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme (SDCEP) is an initiative
of the National Dental Advisory Committee (NDAC) and is supported by the
Scottish Government and NHS Education for Scotland. The Programme aims
to provide user-friendly, evidence-based guidance for the dental profession
in Scotland.

SDCEP guidance is designed to help the dental team provide improved care
for patients by bringing together, in a structured manner, the best available
information that is relevant to priority areas in dentistry, and presenting this
information in a form that can be interpreted easily and implemented.

`Emergency Dental Care' aims to promote a systematic approach to the
care of patients with dental emergencies and to achieve more equitable
provision of unscheduled dental care within Scotland. It is intended to
complement the national work on emergency dental service development
involving NHS Boards and NHS 24.

The guidance focuses on the patient journey to providers of care and
includes specific self-help advice for dental staff to give to patients and a
simple method for prioritising dental emergencies in primary care practice.
It also provides quality standards that specify the requirements of out-of-
hours emergency dental services for use by NHS Boards and all dentists.

Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme
Dundee Dental Education Centre, Frankland Building,
Small's Wynd, Dundee DD1 4HN

Email scottishdental.cep@nes.scot.nhs.uk

Tel  01382 425751 / 425771

Website www.scottishdental.org/cep
