March 2017





Dundee Dent • scottishdent Email NESD0691 | Designed and typese



•

• continue to provide

care setting.

the recommendations Osteonecrosis of the The main elements Management

carried out suc

The full guidanc

Drugs Associated with MRONJ Prescribed in the United Kingdom*

Drug Type

Bisphosphonat





RANKL Inhibit



Anti-angiogenic





*Correct at the time of public change and ne (www.sdcep.org.uk) w drugs may be r





Cover image: Highly magnified view of bone eating multinucleated osteoclasts along



scalloped edges of trabecular bone due to osteoclastic bone resorption. © Shutterstock





March 2017



Accreditation is valid for 5 years from 15 March 2016. More information on Accreditation is valid for 5 years from 15 March 2016. More information on accreditation can be viewed at www.nice.org.uk/accreditation. accreditation can be viewed at www.nice.org.uk/accreditation.

For further information about SDCEP’s accreditation, visit www.sdcep.org.uk/how-­we-­work/nice-­accreditation. For further information about SDCEP’s accreditation, visit www.sdcep.org.uk/how-­we-­work/nice-­accreditation.



©Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme ©Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme SDCEP operates within NHS Education for Scotland. You may SDCEP operates within NHS Education for Scotland. You may

© Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme copy or reproduce the information in this document for use within copy or reproduce the information in this document for use within SDCEP operates within NHS Education for Scotland. You may NHSScotland and for non-­‐commercial educational purposes. NHSScotland and for non-­‐commercial educational purposes. copy or reproduce the information in this document for use within Use of this document for commercial purposes is not permitted. Use of this document for commercial purposes is not permitted. NHSScotland and for non-commercial educational purposes. ISBN 978 1 905829 30 9 ISBN 978 1 905829 30 9

Use of this document for commercial purposes is not permitted. First published 2017 First published 2017

ISBN 978 1 905829 30 9

First published 2017 Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme

Dundee Dental Education Centre, Frankland Building, Small’s Wynd, Dundee DD1 4HN Dundee Dental Education Centre, Frankland Building, Small’s Wynd, Dundee DD1 4HN

Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme

Dundee Dental Education Centre, Frankland Building, Small’s Wynd, Dundee DD1 4HN Email Email scottishdental.cep@nes.scot.nhs.uk scottishdental.cep@nes.scot.nhs.uk

TelTel 01382 425751 / 425771 01382 425751 / 425771

Email Website Website scottishdental.cep@nes.scot.nhs.uk www.sdcep.org.uk www.sdcep.org.uk

Tel 01382 425751 / 425771

Website www.sdcep.org.uk



5.1 Recommendations for Research 17

5.2 Recommendations for Audit 17

Appendix 1 Guidance Development 18

The Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme 18

The Programme Development Team 18

The Guidance Development Group 19

Guidance Development Methodology 20

Review and Updating 21

Steering Group 21

Conflict of Interest 21



Appendix 2 Drugs Associated with MRONJ Prescribed in the United Kingdom 22

Appendix 3 Managing the Oral Health of Patients at Risk of MRONJ 23

Appendix 4 Points to Cover During MRONJ Risk Discussion 24

Appendix 5 Guidance for Prescribers and Dispensers of Anti-resorptive or

Anti-angiogenic Drugs 27

Appendix 6 Patient Information 28

References 29





iii


iv N.B. Patients who have previously taken anti-angiogenic drugs in combination with anti-resorptive drugs should be allocated to a risk group based on their history of anti-resorptive drug use.





Initial Management of Patients at Risk of MRONJ [Refer to Section 4]

Before commencement of anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drug therapy, or as soon as possible

thereafter, aim to get the patient as dentally fit as feasible, prioritising preventive care. Higher risk

cancer patients should preferably undergo a thorough dental assessment, with remedial dental

treatment where required, prior to commencement of the drug therapy.

Advise the patient (or carer, where appropriate) that, due to the medication they are taking, there may

be a risk of developing MRONJ but ensure that they understand that the risk is small. It is very important

that a patient is not discouraged from taking their anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic medication or from

undergoing dental treatment. Record that this advice has been given.

Give personalised preventive advice to help the patient optimise their oral health.

Prioritise care that will reduce mucosal trauma or may help avoid future extractions or any oral surgery

or procedures that may impact on bone.

For medically complex patients for whom you would normally seek advice, including higher risk patients

who are being treated with anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs for the management of cancer,

consider consulting an oral surgery/special care dentistry specialist with regards to clinical assessment

and treatment planning.





v


protocols.

If you suspect a patient has spontaneous MRONJ, refer to an oral surgery/special care dentistry specialist

as per local protocols.

Consider reporting any suspected case of MRONJ to the MHRA via the Yellow Card Scheme (www.yellowcard.mhra.gov.uk) and encourage the patient to do likewise.

Higher Risk Patients

Having made the patient as dentally fit as feasible:

Carry out most routine dental treatment as normal and continue to provide personalised preventive

advice.

For medically complex patients for whom you would normally seek advice, including higher risk patients

who are being treated with anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs for the management of cancer,

consider consulting an oral surgery/special care dentistry specialist with regards to clinical assessment

and treatment planning.





vi





vii


viii drugs that have been implicated in the development of MRONJ. The recommendations in this guidance have been updated to reflect the most up-to-date evidence and advances in clinical experience with this patient group.





1.2 Development and Presentation of the Guidance Recommendations

To develop the recommendations for this guidance, SDCEP convened a multidisciplinary guidance development group including medical and dental practitioners and specialists along with patient representatives (Appendix 1). The key recommendations presented in the guidance were developed through considered judgements, made by the group, based on existing guidelines, the available evidence, clinical experience, expert opinion and patient and practitioner perspectives. Details of these considered judgements are available at www.sdcep.org.uk. The impact of potential barriers identified during guidance development and through stakeholder involvement and external consultation was also considered when formulating the recommendations.

Throughout the text, these symbols are used to denote specific types of information

Key recommendations – presented at the beginning of sections to communicate the core

messages within the section

Evidence summary – an overview of the evidence which informs the recommendations within the

guidance.



1

• Advice on how to discuss MRONJ risk with patients is presented in Appendix 4.



• Information for prescribers and dispensers of anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs is presented in Appendix 5.

• General information to provide to patients in the form of a leaflet is presented in Appendix 6.

The following guidance for dental practitioners in primary care is also summarised at the beginning of the publication.



1.4 Statement of Intent

This guidance is based on careful consideration of the available information and resources at the time of publication and has been developed through consultation with experts and end-users (see Appendix 1). As guidance, it does not override the healthcare professional’s right, and duty, to make decisions appropriate to each patient, with their informed consent. However, it is advised that departures from this guidance, and the reasons for this, are fully documented in the patient’s clinical record.

SDCEP is funded by NES (NHS Education for Scotland). The views and opinions of NES have not in any way influenced the recommendations made in this guidance.

This resource may be made available, in full or summary form, in alternative formats and community languages. Please contact us on 0131 656 3200 or email altformats@nes.scot.nhs.uk to discuss how we can best meet your requirements.



2



MRONJ has been observed in patients being treated with anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic Please refer

drugs for management of solid tumour cancers (e.g. breast cancer, prostate cancer) and multiple to 2024

myeloma and other cancers of the blood. Estimates of incidence and prevalence vary due to supplement the rare nature of MRONJ. In these cancer patients, the MRONJ risk ranges from 0 to 12% (0-1200 cases for updated per 10,000) incidence 2-5 compared to a risk of 0 to 0.02% (0-2 cases of ONJ per 10,000) in cancer patients exposed to

placebo in clinical trials.1 However, it should be noted that estimates towards the higher end of this range information

tended to come from studies with small sample sizes which can overestimate the risk of low frequency events. When only considering data from studies with >500 patients, the risk of MRONJ in cancer patients approximates 1% (ranging from 0 to 2.3%).ǂ This agrees with an estimate of MRONJ risk based on studies with Level 1 evidence (systematic reviews or RCTs).1 However, it should be noted that incidence may vary depending on cancer type and treatment regime, with patients with prostate cancer or multiple myeloma thought to be at increased risk. There are fewer data available to estimate the risk of MRONJ in cancer patients treated with anti-angiogenic drugs. However, one study reports a risk of 0.2% (20 cases per 10,000) in cancer patients treated with bevacizumab.6 It also appears the risk is increased when anti-angiogenics are used in conjunction with anti-resorptive drugs (both given simultaneously) or are given to those with a history of bisphosphonate use.1



MRONJ Incidence in Osteoporosis Patients

The risk of MRONJ in patients being treated with oral anti-resorptive drugs for osteoporosis is lower

than the risk for patients being treated for cancer. Estimates range from 0 to 0.1% (0-10 cases per

10,000),1,2,5,7-9 with a recent UK study estimating incidence to be ‘more than 1 in 10,000 and less

ǂ 2 Estimate based on data extracted from primary studies by Khan et al.

3

leading to decreased bone resorption and remodelling. The jaw is known to have an increased remodelling rate compared to other skeletal sites and therefore the viability of bone in this region may be adversely affected by the action of these drugs.

There are two main types of anti-resorptive drugs that have been associated with osteonecrosis of the jaw, the bisphosphonates and denosumab. These are used in the management of osteoporosis and other non-malignant and malignant conditions. Anti-resorptive drugs can have a significantly positive effect on the quality of life of patients by reducing or delaying onset of disease or treatment complications, such as bone fractures and bone pain.

Bisphosphonates

The bisphosphonates reduce bone resorption by inhibiting enzymes essential to the formation, recruitment and function of osteoclasts. The drugs have a high affinity for hydroxyapatite and persist in the skeletal tissue for a significant period of time, with alendronate having a half-life in bone of around 10 years.15 However, it is unclear how this influences the risk of MRONJ once a patient has stopped taking the drugs. It is speculated that the bisphosphonates may also have an adverse effect on soft tissue cells by inhibiting proliferation and increasing apoptosis, which may lead to delayed soft tissue healing.16,17 There is also some evidence that these drugs can inhibit angiogenesis.18

Bisphosphonates are used to reduce the symptoms and complications of metastatic bone disease (particularly that associated with breast cancer, prostate cancer and multiple myeloma). The drugs are usually delivered as regular high dose intravenous infusions in this patient group.



4



and there is some evidence that this results in a greater MRONJ risk.6 This may also be true where anti-angiogenic drugs are used in patients with a previous history of bisphosphonate use.

The use of anti-angiogenic drugs in cancer is an expanding field and it is likely that any future medications with these modes of action may also have an associated risk of MRONJ.



2.4 Treatment of MRONJ

The treatment of MRONJ is beyond the scope of this guidance as patients with suspected MRONJ

should be referred to a specialist. A Cochrane Review22 published in 2016 investigated the safety

and efficacy of interventions for treating bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw. However, the authors found a lack of evidence from randomised controlled trials and concluded that high quality randomised controlled trials are needed.



2.5 MRONJ in Children

Bisphosphonates are used in children for the management of osteogenesis imperfecta, fibrous dysplasia, neuromuscular disorders, bone dysplasia, idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis, rheumatologic disorders and Crohn’s disease.23 The evidence for MRONJ in paediatric patients is scarce, with three review articles stating that there have been no cases of MRONJ reported in the paediatric patient group.23-25 Children who are prescribed anti-resorptive drugs to manage these medical conditions are likely to be managed by specialists in paediatric dentistry.



5

6



The risk of MRONJ in patients being treated with bisphosphonate drugs is thought to increase

as the cumulative dose of the drug increases, as a consequence of the long half-life of this

drug class. This may explain the increased MRONJ risk in patients being treated with high dose bisphosphonate drugs for the management of cancer compared to those being treated with the lower dose, mostly oral drugs for the management of osteoporosis or other non-malignant diseases of the bone. However, even in this lower risk patient group, the MRONJ risk may be influenced by the length of time that a patient has been exposed to the drug, with one study finding a higher prevalence of MRONJ in patients who had taken oral bisphosphonates for more than four years compared to those who had taken the drugs for less than this time period.12

Other Concurrent Medication

Chronic systemic glucocorticoid use has been reported in some studies to increase the risk for

MRONJ when taken in combination with anti-resorptive drugs.30,33-36 However, the association has

not been observed in other studies.37-39 The combination of bisphosphonates and anti-angiogenic agents has also been associated with increased risk of MRONJ.6,30 The risk appears to be increased if the drugs are taken concurrently or if there has been a history of bisphosphonate use.6,30

Dental Implants

The risk of MRONJ following the placement of dental implants in patients being treated with anti-

resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs is currently unknown.1 It is generally agreed that implant

placement should be avoided in patients who are being treated with high dose anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs for the management of cancer.1,2



7

responsibility of the prescribing physician and dental practitioners should not discourage patients from continuing with their medication.

Although not strictly a drug holiday, an acceptable management option for patients with osteoporosis who are being treated with six monthly subcutaneous injections of denosumab is to delay any non-urgent invasive dental treatment in an asymptomatic tooth until the month prior to the patient’s next scheduled drug administration. Resumption of denosumab treatment following invasive dental treatment should be delayed until the soft tissues/extraction socket have healed. It will therefore be necessary to closely liaise with the patient’s medical practitioner to successfully coordinate this management option.

Previous Treatment with Anti-resorptive or Anti-angiogenic Drugs

There is currently no evidence to inform the assessment of risk for patients who have previously taken anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs.

Bisphosphonates are known to remain in the body for a significant amount of time after the patient stops taking them. Therefore, if a patient has taken bisphosphonate drugs in the past but is no longer taking them for whatever reason (i.e. completed or discontinued the course or taking a drug holiday), they should be allocated to a risk group as if they are still taking the drugs.

The effect of denosumab on bone turnover diminishes within nine months of treatment completion.14,19

Anti-angiogenic drugs are not thought to remain in the body for extended periods of time.



8



that patients taking calcium or vitamin D supplements only are not considered to be at risk of MRONJ.

The Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN, www.sign.ac.uk) Clinical Guideline 142, Management of Osteoporosis and the Prevention of Fragility Fractures,52 recommends that bisphosphonate therapy should be evaluated every five years to determine if the benefits in continuing therapy outweigh potential risks. As the risk of MRONJ is thought to increase in this patient group as the duration of exposure increases,12 those patients who continue to take bisphosphonates after this five-year medication review are considered to be at higher risk of MRONJ and their risk level should be reclassified accordingly.

Patients who have taken bisphosphonate drugs at any time in the past and those who have taken denosumab in the last nine months should be assessed and allocated to a risk group as if they are still taking the drugs.

Risk Categories

The low risk category will include those patients who have been treated for osteoporosis or other non-malignant diseases of bone with bisphosphonates for less than five years or with denosumab and who are not taking concurrent systemic glucocorticoids.

The higher risk category will include cancer patients and also those being treated for osteoporosis or other non-malignant diseases of bone who have other modifying risk factors. The categorisation of these two patient groups in the same higher risk category does not imply that both groups have the same absolute risk level. It simply reflects the need for more considered treatment planning in these higher risk groups.



9

N.B. Patients who have taken bisphosphonate drugs at any time in the past and those who have taken denosumab in the last nine months are allocated to a risk group as if they are still taking the drug.



10



last nine months? drug for?



NO YES < 5 YEARS > 5 YEARS



Is the patient being concurrently

treated with a systemic glucocorticoid?



NO YES



NO LOW HIGHER

RISK RISK RISK



11

reclassified as higher risk.

If a patient has taken anti-resorptive drugs in the past but is no longer taking them for whatever

reason (i.e. completed or discontinued the course or taking a drug holiday), allocate them to a risk

group as follows:



• If a patient has taken bisphosphonates in the past, allocate them to a risk group as if they are still taking the drugs.



• If a patient has taken denosumab in the past nine months, allocate them to a risk group as if they are still taking the drug.



• Patients who have previously taken anti-angiogenic drugs in combination with anti-resorptive drugs should be allocated to a risk group based on their history of anti-

resorptive drug use.



12



There is some low quality evidence, mainly based on observational studies, that preventive dental

regimes can decrease the risk of oral complications in this patient group by reducing the need for

subsequent extractions or other procedures which impact on bone.53-58 For some patients this may require a change in behaviour in terms of brushing, interdental cleaning and other oral hygiene techniques, as well as other lifestyle behaviours such as diet and tobacco use. There may also be a benefit in prescribing high fluoride toothpaste for those patients with increased caries risk.

For patients who are about to commence treatment with anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs, or those who have very recently started drug therapy:



Advise the patient (or carer, where appropriate) that, due to the medication they are taking, there

may be a risk of developing MRONJ but ensure that they understand that the risk is small. It is very

important that a patient is not discouraged from taking their anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic

medication or from undergoing dental treatment. Record that this advice has been given. A list of

points to cover in such a discussion can be found in Appendix 4.

Give personalised preventive advice to help the patient optimise their oral health, emphasising the

importance of:

• having a healthy diet and reducing sugary snacks and drinks;

• maintaining excellent oral hygiene;

• using fluoride toothpaste and fluoride mouthwash;



13

of cancer, consider consulting an oral surgery/special care dentistry specialist with regards to

clinical assessment and treatment planning.

Once the patient is dentally fit, undertake routine dental treatment as outlined in Section 4.2.

In the situation where a patient presents with an established history of anti-resorptive or anti-

angiogenic drug use (e.g. an existing patient who has not attended for some time or a patient new

to your practice), follow the advice for extractions or other procedures which impact on bone in low

or higher risk patients as outlined in Section 4.2.



N.B. Advise patients who are prescribed an oral bisphosphonate not to hold the tablet in the mouth due to risk of damage to the oral mucosa. Advise patients to follow the instructions for administration given by their doctor or pharmacist or as included in the drug information leaflet.



14



antibiotic and/or antiseptic prophylaxis as one of a combination of measures to prevent MRONJ. There is currently insufficient evidence to support the use of antibiotic or topical antiseptic prophylaxis to reduce the risk of MRONJ following extractions or procedures that impact on bone.

Low Risk Patients

See Table 3.1 for a description of patients considered to be at low risk of developing MRONJ.

Having made the patient as dentally fit as feasible:

Carry out all routine dental treatment as normal and continue to provide personalised preventive

advice.

• If an extraction or another procedure that impacts on bone is required:

o Discuss the risks and benefits associated with treatment with the patient (or carer, where

appropriate) to ensure valid consent. See Appendix 4 for points to cover during this discussion;

o Proceed with the treatment as clinically indicated;

o Do not prescribe antibiotic or antiseptic prophylaxis unless required for other clinical

reasons;

o Advise the patient to contact the practice if they have any concerns, such as unexpected

pain, tingling, numbness, altered sensation or swelling in the extraction area;



15

retained e.g. retaining roots in absence of infection.

• If extraction remains the most appropriate treatment:

o Discuss the risks and benefits associated with treatment with the patient (or carer, where

appropriate) to ensure valid consent. See Appendix 4 for points to cover during this discussion;

o Proceed with the extraction as clinically indicated;

o Do not prescribe antibiotic or antiseptic prophylaxis unless required for other clinical

reasons;

o Advise the patient to contact the practice if they have any concerns, such as unexpected

pain, tingling, numbness, altered sensation or swelling in the extraction area;

o Review healing. If the extraction socket is not healed at 8 weeks and you suspect that the

patient has MRONJ, refer to an oral surgery/special care dentistry specialist as per local protocols.

If you suspect a patient has spontaneous MRONJ, refer to an oral surgery/special care dentistry

specialist as per local protocols.

Consider reporting any suspected case of MRONJ to the MHRA via the Yellow Card Scheme

(www.yellowcard.mhra.gov.uk) and encourage the patient to do likewise.



N.B. If a MRONJ lesion is confirmed, the oral surgery/special care dentistry specialist will notify you and the patient’s general medical practitioner.



16



• compliance with recommendations within the guidance, for example assigning a MRONJ risk level for each patient taking anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs.



17

The Programme Development Team operates within NHS Education for Scotland and is responsible for the methodology of guidance development. Working with members of the Guidance Development Group, the team facilitates all aspects of guidance development by providing project management and administrative support, searching and appraising information and evidence, conducting research, liaising with external organisations, editing the guidance and managing the publication and dissemination of guidance materials. The following members of the Programme Development Team were directly involved in the development of Oral Health Management of Patients at Risk of Medication-related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw.

Jan Clarkson Professor of Clinical Effectiveness, University of Dundee;

SDCEP Director

Doug Stirling Programme Manager – Guidance and Programme Development

Samantha Rutherford Research and Development Manager – Guidance Development

and Lead for this guidance project

Linda Young Programme Manager - Evaluation of Implementation

Heather Cassie Research Fellow

Laura Lovelock-Hempleman Clinical Research Dental Hygienist-Therapist

Margaret Mooney Administrator



18



Pamela Kidd General Dental Practitioner, Glasgow

Penny Lockwood General Medical Practitioner, Dundee; Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer,

University of Dundee

Nick Malden Consultant in Oral Surgery, Edinburgh Dental Institute

Anna Macdonald Senior Dental Officer, Specialist in Special Care Dentistry, Perth

Gillian Nevin General Dental Practitioner, Coupar Angus; Assistant Director of

Postgraduate GDP Education, NHS Education for Scotland

Terence O’Neill Professor of Rheumatology and Clinical Epidemiology, University of

Manchester; Member of the Clinical & Scientific Committee, National Osteoporosis Society

David Reid Emeritus Professor of Rheumatology, University of Aberdeen

Andrew Wight General Dental Practitioner, Dundee

The Guidance Development Group would like to thank Anne Littlewood, Trials Search Co-ordinator, Cochrane Oral Health Group, for performing the literature searches that underpin the development of this guidance. The Guidance Development Group would also like to acknowledge the contributions of Alison Wright, Gavin Wilson and David Comerford to the evidence appraisal process.



19

potentially eligible if it met all of the following criteria:

1. The article was a systematic review or a guideline. An article would be included as a systematic

review, if it included a methods section, a search of one or more electronic databases and a table

of included studies.

2. The article dealt with an aspect of referred to (i) anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs and

(ii) osteonecrosis of the jaw in the context of dental treatment.

3. The article was in English.

Additional manual searching of guideline repositories and other resources, and follow up of citations from relevant articles found through the systematic searching, was also carried out. Other sources of evidence identified by GDG members were also considered, taking relevance and methodological quality into account.

A list of clinical questions related to the scope of the guidance was compiled by members of the GDG and eligible articles which were relevant for each question were identified. For the development of this guidance SDCEP used the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation) approach to assess and rate the quality of evidence (www.gradeworkinggroup.org). For guidelines, the AGREE II instrument was used, in addition to GRADE, to assess the methodological quality of the retrieved articles (www.agreetrust.org).



20



development groups and the dental institutions in Scotland. For up-to-date membership of the Steering Group, refer to the SDCEP website (www.sdcep.org.uk).



Conflict of Interest

All contributors to SDCEP are required to declare their financial, intellectual and other relevant interests. At each group meeting, participants are asked to confirm whether there are any changes to these. Should any potential conflicts of interest arise, these are discussed and actions for their management agreed. All declarations of interest and decisions about potential conflicts of interest are available on request.



21

RANKL Inhibitors

Drug name Trade name(s) Indication

Prolia® osteoporosis

denosumab

Xgeva® treatment of cancer



Anti-angiogenic Drugs

Drug name Trade name(s) Indication

bevacizumab Avastin® treatment of cancer

sunitinib Sutent® treatment of cancer

aflibercept Zaltrap® treatment of cancer



*Correct at the time of publication. This list is not exhaustive. Be aware that drug trade names can change and new drugs may be released that may be implicated in MRONJ. Consult the SDCEP website (www.sdcep.org.uk) for an up-to-date list of the drugs with an MHRA Drug Safety Update for risk of MRONJ.



22



restorations, recall and radiological review.



Where a subsequent or other procedure which impacts on bone is required

Low risk patients Higher risk patients

Discuss the risks of the procedure with Aim to avoid these procedures by

the patient to ensure valid consent. considering other treatment options.



Treat the patient as normal for If extraction or other procedure which

extractions and any other procedure impacts on bone remains the most

which impacts on bone. appropriate option, discuss the risks

Do not prescribe antibiotic prophylaxis of the procedure with the patient to

unless otherwise indicated. ensure valid consent.



Review healing

If the extraction socket is not healed at 8 weeks and you suspect that the patient has MRONJ,

refer to an oral surgery/special care dentistry specialist as per local protocols.



Refer any patient with evidence of spontaneous MRONJ.



23

to outweigh the small risk of developing MRONJ and, in the case of the bisphosphonates or

denosumab, stopping the drug does not eliminate the risk of developing MRONJ.

Discuss the overall risk of MRONJ with the patient, based on the medical condition for which they are

being treated, using language that they are able to understand. Stress that the risk is small and that the

disease is an adverse effect of the medication and is not caused by dental treatment.



• For patients being treated with anti-resorptive or anti-angiogenic drugs for the management of Please refer cancer, the risk of MRONJ approximates 1% (range 0 – 2.3%), which suggests that each patient has to 2024 supplement a 1 in 100 chance of developing the disease. However, the risk appears to vary based on cancer type for updated and incidence in patients with prostate cancer or multiple myeloma may be higher. incidence • For patients taking anti-resorptive drugs for the prevention or management of non-malignant information disease (e.g. osteoporosis, Paget’s disease), the risk of MRONJ approximates 0.1% or less, which

suggests that each patient has between a 1 in 1000 and 1 in 10,000 chance of developing the

disease.



• Patients who take concurrent glucocorticoid medication or those who are prescribed both anti-resorptive and anti-angiogenic drugs to manage their medical condition may be at higher risk.



• The incidence of MRONJ after tooth extraction is estimated to be 2.9% in patients with cancer and 0.15% in patients being treated for osteoporosis.



24



their doctor or pharmacist or as included in the drug information leaflet.



Discuss with the patient the steps you will take to reduce their risk of MRONJ.





• Explain that you will carry out any necessary remedial dental treatment (e.g. extractions, periodontal treatment, refitting appliances or dentures) at an early stage in their medical treatment to ‘future-



proof’ their oral health, with the aim of preventing the need for higher risk procedures, such as



extractions, in future.





• Patients at higher risk from dental caries may also benefit from high fluoride toothpaste or mouthwash.



Appendix 4 continued overleaf...



25

Patients who have exposed bone at 8 weeks or who present with spontaneous MRONJ

Advise the patient that due to the presence of exposed bone in their jaw, they need to be referred to a

specialist for further treatment.



• If the patient wishes to know more about the treatment that may be provided in secondary care, advise them that, in general, for cases where only a small amount of bone is exposed treatment

may include monitoring, oral hygiene instruction, antibiotics or antibacterial mouth rinses. In cases

where a large amount of bone is exposed, surgery may be indicated. However, the treatment they

will receive will depend on their individual symptoms and clinical presentation.



26



the local NHS Health Board.



27



What else can I do? • Ensure that you tell your dentist about all the medications you are taking and your medical history You may find additional helpf esources y stated above problems that you age, there would includes about any health . Tell your dentist National Ost or developing MRONJ be one case only people e dental of MRONJ dentist can assess your individual risk f eoporosis Socie ul information on the f that may requirwho take the Paget’s Association vent oral diseases for every 10,000 drugs. best way to pre ty (www.nos. ollowing websit patients For Talk to your dentist about oral hygiene This leafle carefully is the ective. (www.page eeth regularly and org.uk) es: who take Cleaning your t Scotland. This and other patient inf t has been e the cleaning technique you use is eff t.org.uk) an help you ensur developed surgery. Your dentist c by the Scottish e in ormation is available on the SDCEP websit Dental Clinic . For help and advic you stop/give up services to help al Effectiveness • Stop smoking There are various com. ect your oral health. o www.canstopsmoking. NESD0691 | Designed and typse © Scottish Dent Programme (SDCEP), Smoking can aff al Clinic e (www eline (0800 84 84 84) or go t Scotland, call Smok al Effectiv .sdcep.org.uk). part of NHS t by the NES Design Ser eness Pr Education ogramme for • Reduce the frequency of sugary snacks and drinks . vice | MARCH 2017 Regular consumption of sugary snacks and drinks can lead to tooth decay. al diseases. veloping some dent • Reduce the amount of alcohol you drink an increase your risk of de ohol consumption c Regular heavy alc





28





Osteoporosis International. 2013;24(1):237-244.



9 Hellstein JW, Adler RA, Edwards B, et al. Managing the care of patients receiving antiresorptive

therapy for prevention and treatment of osteoporosis: executive summary of recommendations

from the American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs. Journal of the American Dental

Association. 2011;142(11):1243-1251.

10 Rogers SN, Palmer NO, Lowe D, Randall C. United Kingdom nationwide study of avascular necrosis

of the jaws including bisphosphonate-related necrosis. The British Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial

Surgery. 2015;53(2):176-182.

11 Sammut S, Malden N, Lopes V, Ralston S. Epidemiological study of alendronate-related osteonecrosis

of the jaw in the southeast of Scotland. The British Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery.

2016;54(5):501-505.

12 Lo JC, O’Ryan FS, Gordon NP, et al. Prevalence of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with oral

bisphosphonate exposure. Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. 2010;68(2):243-253.

13 Grbic JT, Black DM, Lyles KW, et al. The incidence of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients receiving

5 milligrams of zoledronic acid: data from the health outcomes and reduced incidence with

zoledronic acid once yearly clinical trials program. Journal of the American Dental Association.

2010;141(11):1365-1370.

14 Prolia 60 mg solution in a pre-filled syringe: Summary of Product Characteristics. Amgen Ltd. 2016;

(www.medicines.org.uk/emc/medicine/23127. Accessed 01/12/16).



29

24 Bhatt RN, Hibbert SA, Munns CF. The use of bisphosphonates in children: review of the literature and

guidelines for dental management. Australian Dental Journal 2014;59(1):9-19.

25 Hennedige AA, Jayasinghe J, Khajeh J, Macfarlane TV. Systematic review on the incidence of

bisphosphonate related osteonecrosis of the jaw in children diagnosed with osteogenesis

imperfecta. Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Research. 2013;4(4):e1.

26 Thumbigere-Math V, Michalowicz BS, Hodges JS, et al. Periodontal disease as a risk factor for

bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw. Journal of Periodontology. 2014;85(2):226-233.

27 Schipmann S, Metzler P, Rossle M, et al. Osteopathology associated with bone resorption inhibitors

- which role does Actinomyces play? A presentation of 51 cases with systematic review of the

literature. Journal of Oral Pathology & Medicine. 2013;42(8):587-593.

28 Gaudin E, Seidel L, Bacevic M, Rompen E, Lambert F. Occurrence and risk indicators of medication-

related osteonecrosis of the jaw after dental extraction: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Journal of Clinical Periodontology. 2015;42(10):922-932.

29 Fehm T, Beck V, Banys M, et al. Bisphosphonate-induced osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ): Incidence

and risk factors in patients with breast cancer and gynecological malignancies. Gynecologic

Oncology. 2009;112(3):605-609.

30 Saad F, Brown JE, Van Poznak C, et al. Incidence, risk factors, and outcomes of osteonecrosis of the

jaw: integrated analysis from three blinded active-controlled phase III trials in cancer patients with

bone metastases. Annals of Oncology. 2012;23(5):1341-1347.



30



Surgery. 2009;67(4):850-855.

39 Lazarovici TS, Yahalom R, Taicher S, Schwartz-Arad D, Peleg O, Yarom N. Bisphosphonate-related

osteonecrosis of the jaw associated with dental implants. Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery.

2010;68(4):790-796.

40 Ata-Ali J, Ata-Ali F, Penarrocha-Oltra D, Galindo-Moreno P. What is the impact of bisphosphonate

therapy upon dental implant survival? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Oral Implants

Research. 2016;27(2):e38-46.

41 Chadha GK, Ahmadieh A, Kumar S, Sedghizadeh PP. Osseointegration of dental implants and

osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients treated with bisphosphonate therapy: a systematic review.

Journal of Oral Implantology. 2013;39(4):510-520.

42 Famili P, Quigley S, Mosher T. Survival of dental implants among post-menopausal female dental

school patients taking oral bisphosphonates: a retrospective study. Compendium of Continuing

Education in Dentistry. 2011;32(6):E106-109.

43 Koka S, Babu NM, Norell A. Survival of dental implants in post-menopausal bisphosphonate users.

Journal of Prosthodontic Research. 2010;54(3):108-111.

44 Liddelow G, Klineberg I. Patient-related risk factors for implant therapy. A critique of pertinent

literature. Australian Dental Journal. 2011;56(4):417-426; quiz 441.



31

Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network; 2015. (www.sign.ac.uk)

53 Kyrgidis A, Tzellos TG, Toulis K, Arora A, Kouvelas D, Triaridis S. An evidence-based review of

risk-reductive strategies for osteonecrosis of the jaws among cancer patients. Current Clinical

Pharmacology. 2013;8(2):124-134.

54 Bramati A, Girelli S, Farina G, et al. Prospective, mono-institutional study of the impact of a systematic

prevention program on incidence and outcome of osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients treated with

bisphosphonates for bone metastases. Journal of Bone and Mineral Metabolism. 2015;33(1):119-124.

55 Vandone AM, Donadio M, Mozzati M, et al. Impact of dental care in the prevention of bisphosphonate-

associated osteonecrosis of the jaw: a single-center clinical experience. Annals of Oncology.

2012;23(1):193-200.

56 Bonacina R, Mariani U, Villa F, Villa A. Preventive strategies and clinical implications for

bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaw: a review of 282 patients. Journal of the Canadian

Dental Association. 2011;77:b147.

57 Francini F, Pascucci A, Francini E, et al. Osteonecrosis of the jaw in patients with cancer who received

zoledronic acid and bevacizumab. Journal of the American Dental Association. 2011;142(5):506-513.

58 Ripamonti CI, Maniezzo M, Campa T, et al. Decreased occurrence of osteonecrosis of the jaw after

implementation of dental preventive measures in solid tumour patients with bone metastases

treated with bisphosphonates. The experience of the National Cancer Institute of Milan. Annals of

Oncology. 2009;20(1):137-145.



32



33

34



35

36



Scottish Dent al Educ al.cep@nes.sc



Dundee Dent scottishdent NESD0691 | Designed and typese Email





this guidance of relevance.





Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme

Dundee Dental Education Centre, Frankland Building, Small’s Wynd, Dundee DD1 4HN



Email: scottishdental.cep@nes.scot.nhs.uk | Tel: 01382 425751 / 425771

Website: www.sdcep.org.uk



NESD0691 | Designed and typeset by the NES Design Service | MARCH 2017





