Leeds Dental Institute

FACULTY OF MEDICINE AND HEALTH



Paediatric Dentistry



Clinical Handbook



Updated 2017





Photo courtesy of the British Society of Paediatric Dentistry





http://www.bspd.co.uk http://www.iapdworld.org/main.php





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




British Society of Paediatric Dentistry (BSPD)



BSPD was founded in 1968 with the aim of improving the oral health of children in the UK.



BSPD are campaigning to:



 Ensure that all children are seen by a dentist by the age of one (Dental Check

By One)

 Ensure that all communities in the UK have access to a paediatric dental

specialist, within a reasonable distance

 Support the training and development of dentists with enhanced skills in the

treatment and management of children

 Promote research into all issues affecting the oral health of children

 Explore the feasibility of a national programme of prevention, promote

availability of fluoridated water and increase access to fluoride varnishes and toothpastes, with the aim of reducing inequalities in oral health



Over the course of the year, the local BSPD Ridings Branch organises several lectures, usually at the Leeds Dental Institute, on various topics related to Paediatric Dentistry.



Each year, a BSPD Undergraduate Representative will be selected from one of the fourth year dental students at Leeds.



We would encourage every undergraduate dental student to become a member of BSPD; the annual cost for student membership is £15.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Clinical Handbook

For

The Department of Paediatric

Dentistry





Edited by

Jinous Tahmassebi & Richard Balmer





Contributors to this handbook:

Richard Balmer

Jinous Tahmassebi

Grace Lowe

Rose Bannister

Esther McDerra

Stephen Fayle

Alaa Bani Hani

Peter Day

Susan Kindelan

Kate Kenny

Sarah Ainscough

Bernadette Drummond





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





Contents




Introduction…………………………………………………...………….. 3



Jackson Prize………………………………………………...…………… 4-5



Subjects:



 History and Examination..…………………………………………6-17



 Behaviour Management..……………………………………......18-26



 Prevention..………………………………………………………..27-45



 Local Anaesthetic ……………………………………………......46-49



 Moisture Control………………………………………….............50-53



 Restorative Dentistry.…………………………………………….54-67



 Interceptive Orthodontics…………………………………….......68-78



 Dental Trauma…………………………………………………….79-86



 Children with Special Needs……………………………………..87-99



 Sedation and General Anaesthesia…………….……………100-108



 Dental Anomalies in Children…………………………………109-121





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Introduction



Paediatric Dentistry is the practice of oral health care for infants, children and adolescents (from birth to the age of sixteen). By definition it is a speciality limited only by age and therefore incorporates all the dental disciplines to provide comprehensive care to a group who are unique in their stages of development, oral diseases, behaviour and oral health care.



This manual is for the guidance of all undergraduate and postgraduate students. All students are strongly advised to have this manual with them whenever working in the Paediatric Dental Clinic. There are many blank spaces and pages in the manual. This is for you to annotate it as you wish with your own notes.



Children can be unpredictable; it is essential that any interventional treatment should not be carried out without a dental nurse.



Objectives

The goals of the undergraduate curriculum in Paediatric Dentistry are to:



1. Prepare student dentists to provide on graduation, either by treating or

in selected instances referring, comprehensive dental care for children.

2. Create a positive attitude and development of skills in student dentists

so that on graduation they will provide a high standard of oral health care for children.

3. Develop an attitude towards lifelong learning so that as dentists they

will seek opportunities to further their knowledge and skills in Paediatric Dentistry.

4. Develop dental students to fulfil their responsibilities as health

professionals to children in the community.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Jackson Prize (CP5 Portfolio Paediatric Case)



The Jackson Prize examination will take place in Term 5.2.



Structure: 5 minute presentation followed by 10 minutes of questions



Details:



 Each student is expected to produce a comprehensive poster (see template)

of a child patient who they have treated; the child may have been seen in any department.

 The patient and their treatment do not need to be complex

 Each case should demonstrate the use of appropriate special tests,

examination, diagnosis, treatment planning, prevention, restorative and orthodontic care accompanied by pre-operative radiographs and pre and post-operative photographs

 If the patient has required a general anaesthetic or inhalation sedation as part

of their treatment plan, they can still be used as a case; however ideally they will have been seen by the student for a post-operative review.

 Each student should be able to defend their case and will be expected to have

a clear understanding of the evidence base which informed the management of their patient.

 Good reflection is essential

 This will count for 10% of the CP5 module mark

 The Jackson Prize will be awarded for the best presentation





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




History, Examination & Treatment Planning



History

The history is often taken from the child and the parent; therefore, it is important to establish a good rapport with both from the beginning. Introduce yourself to the child and ask them who they have brought with them (this avoids you assuming it is Grandma instead of Mum!)



An example of a good “ice breaker” for children is the question: “How old are you?” Unlike adults, children are very happy to reveal their age and this gives you a chance to pitch your conversation at the appropriate level of understanding for the child and to think about the milestones associated with the developing occlusion.



For all visits document:

 The date

 The department: e.g. ‘Paeds’ (not ‘Kids!’)

 The clinic: e.g. ‘U/G clinic’, ‘PG Rx’

 Why the patient is here today: e.g. reason for referral (emergency ‘casual’

patient, referral from another dentist etc.), routine treatment, review, etc. If there is a referral letter it is important to document the date of the referral (there may be more than one letter) and write a brief summary of why the patient has been referred.



History of Complaints

Take a history of the symptoms but be aware of potential inaccuracies. Anxious children with toothache may suddenly claim to be much better when faced with the dental environment! Symptoms are often intermittent and can span a long time period, so it is important to document how the symptoms have changed over time. For example, the pain may have developed from an occasional pain when eating to a constant throbbing pain causing the child to be sent home from school with





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




toothache. Find out if the patient has accessed any other emergency care and what treatment was provided, such as antibiotics.



To gain a history of pain for very young children you may have to ask if the child is avoiding certain foods, e.g. cold foods (sensitivity), fruit (food impaction), not eating a meal (pain from chewing) etc.



A history of the child’s previous dental experiences is also essential. Ask if they have a dentist who they see regularly and what their past dental experience has been. Ask about previous experience of:

 Local analgesia

 Fillings

 Extractions

 Trauma

 Ask the child what happened – what was good and what was not so good



If the child has had previous dental experiences, how did they react? If a child has limited experience of dental procedures it is worth remembering that parents (especially mothers) are good at predicting how their child might react to new experiences in the dental setting.



Medical History

 If a new patient is attending, the ‘Medical History Questionnaire’ should be

completed by the parent/carer and signed. You should then check and sign it and get it countersigned by the supervising tutor. All relevant information should be recorded in the medical history section of the electronic patient record

 The medical history must be retaken thoroughly at the beginning of each

course of treatment

 The medical history should be checked at each visit and this should be

documented





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Any changes should be recorded in the medical history summary



Some medical conditions are very common in childhood, such as asthma, so it is worth asking specifically about the condition, rather than just asking about ‘respiratory problems’. You may have to rephrase questions to get an accurate answer; for example, the answer to the question, “Is your child allergic to latex?” may be, “No”, but when asked about an allergy to balloons, it may be a definite “Yes!” With asthma, remember to ask if they use an inhaler, even if it is only occasionally.



It is useful to double check the following:

 Allergies, including hay fever and antihistamine use  Bleeding problems

 Heart and chest problems

 Medication

 Whether they have seen a doctor in the past year



Prevention History

Before you examine a child, it is useful to find out what the family are doing on a daily basis to prevent dental disease. This acts as a good baseline for your prevention prescription and gives you an idea of which areas to target. Where possible, start by asking the child open questions such as, “When do you brush your teeth?” rather than closed questions such as, “Do you brush your teeth twice a day?” Other things to consider are:

 What they usually drink and when (with or in between meals)

 Do they drink milk?

 What sort of cup they use (e.g. normal cup, sippy cup with a lid, bottle)

 If/what they drink in the middle of the night

 What types of snacks they have

 What sort of toothpaste they use (baby or adult toothpaste)

 What they do with the toothpaste after brushing (spit or swallow)

 If they rinse with water after brushing

 If the parents help with brushing





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Examination

Extra-oral examination should include routine examination for signs of facial asymmetry and lymphadenopathy; mouth opening and TMJ movements should also be checked. In cases of acute dental infection, it may be necessary to take the patient’s temperature and note any swelling extra-orally. Oro-facial infections such as herpes labialis and impetigo often manifest extra-orally and should be noted.



Intra-oral examination should include:

 Full dental charting of the primary and permanent teeth

 Note any mobile teeth (close to exfoliation or due to infection) and erupting

teeth

 Examination of the oral mucosa; ensure you roll the patients lips back and

look carefully for abscesses and chronic sinuses (usually buccal)

 Where appropriate, a basic periodontal examination

 Growth and development examination, including orthodontic examination



Special Tests

Special tests include percussion, sensibility testing and radiographs. Usually, a tapping of the tooth lightly with your gloved finger rather than a metal mirror handle is sufficient to establish whether a tooth is tender to percussion; however, this special test can be unreliable in children. Tapping with a mirror handle is very useful if you suspect ankylosis. Sensibility testing is unreliable in primary teeth but is appropriate for permanent teeth, especially traumatised incisors.



Bitewing radiographs are essential for an accurate caries diagnosis unless all interproximal surfaces can be visualised. They also show occlusal areas and the furcation region in primary molars, and hence can show pathology. OPG radiographs are useful to assess the full developing dentition, including the presence and position of permanent successors, the developmental stage of the lower second permanent molars (when considering the prognosis of the first permanent molars), any anomalies (e.g. supernumerary teeth) and pathology. Periapical radiographs are





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




most useful for primary molars when a pulpectomy is being considered and in trauma cases. The FGDP guidelines provide clear guidance of when to take radiographs in children.



If, for any reason, components of the examination or appropriate special tests cannot be completed, this should be recorded, noting reasons why.



Diagnosis

A treatment plan cannot be effectively made without a full, comprehensive diagnosis. In paediatric dentistry, the focus is very much on the total oral health of the child, so the diagnosis should encompass all relevant aspects of oral health. For most children, a comprehensive diagnosis will include 5 common basic diagnostic features with two common modifying factors.



Common basic diagnostic features include:

 Hard tissue dental features

 Caries risk assessment

 Coronal dental caries, tooth surface loss including erosion, developmental

defects etc

 Pulpal pathology (e.g. pulpitis, necrosis etc)

 Periodontal pathology secondary to hard tissue/pulp pathology (e.g.

periradicular periodontitis)

 Primary gingival and periodontal pathology (e.g. gingivitis)

 Developing dentition (e.g. malocclusion, dental age etc)

 Soft tissue health and salivary glands



Common modifying factors include:

 Behavioural (factors which might affect the ability to accept dental treatment):

- Level of previous dental experience

- Anxiety

- Behaviour/cooperation (age related)





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Medical history

 Social factors, e.g. distance to travel, access to care



Caries Risk Assessment

Dental caries is by far the most common significant oral pathology we face in many child patients. Making an accurate assessment of caries risk not only informs preventive care (see prevention chapter), but also determines the oral health review recall period and the interval between special tests such as bitewing radiographs.



Although caries risk is essentially a continuum from zero risk all the way up to extremely high risk, assessing caries risk for an individual patient is not an exact science. Caries is a multifactorial disease, and overall caries risk is determined by many variables, some of which can be adjusted/controlled (e.g. diet, exposure to fluoride) and some of which cannot (e.g. social class, quantity and quality of saliva, enamel defects). Not all of these variables are easy to assess or measure. The different factors can be subdivided into three groups:



1. Past caries experience (evidence of previous dental disease in the child and

in the family). This is the most consistent (and hence most important) predictor of caries risk.

2. Other factors:

 Caries in parents and siblings  Medical history (especially where salivary quality or quantity is affected,

e.g. head/neck radiotherapy, antihistamine use, drugs)

 Social history and socioeconomic background (dental caries is more

common in lower socioeconomic groups at a public health level)

 Dietary habits – especially food frequency, use of sugary drinks  Use of fluoride – daily exposure  Oral hygiene – toothbrushing with appropriate fluoride toothpaste  Salivary flow rate and buffering capacity (not easy to routinely assess

in children)





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




3. Clinical impression: the clinical judgment of the dentist and their ability to

combine risk factors, based on their knowledge of the patient and clinical and socio-demographic information is as good as, if not better than, any other single method listed in group 2 above.



In practice, based on an assessment of these factors, it is clinically useful to classify patients into one of three caries-risk groups:

 Low caries risk (unlikely to develop new caries)

 Increased caries risk (likely to develop new caries)

 Very high caries risk (extremely high risk of new/extensive/rapidly progressing

caries)

This can be achieved by considering the three groups of factors listed above and summarising your judgement of each in a table like the one below:



RISK FACTOR LOW MOD HIGH

Past caries experience

Other factors

Clinical impression

TOTAL



If most of the answers are in the low column, then the patient is probably at low risk of caries. If most of the answers are in the moderate or high column, then the patient is at increased risk of dental caries. ‘Very high risk of caries’ is a special category for those children deemed to be at extreme risk, such as those receiving head/neck radiotherapy etc. An example of how this might work for an individual patient is shown below:





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





The Diagnosis

The diagnosis should be a summary list of the patient’s problems deduced from the information that you have gained so far. This is a list of all the problems you will attempt to treat and any other issues which require monitoring.



An example of a summary list is shown below:

 7-year-old patient, no previous dental experience except check-ups, anxious

 Asthma, allergic to penicillin

 Caries in all primary molars except 54 and 64

 75 and 85 probable pulpal involvement

 74 DO caries, non-vital, chronic periradicular periodontitis with sinus

 Generalised gingivitis with poor plaque control (worse upper anteriors

secondary to mouth-breathing)

 Early mixed dentition, mild skeletal II with moderate upper + lower crowding

 Caries risk assessment: increased risk – diet factors, poor oral hygiene





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Delivery of Care

Once you have established what needs to be done, you need to discuss the treatment options with the patient and parent. The modality of care delivery may be influenced by many factors including behavioural factors, medical history, the complexity/amount of care needed and patient/parent choice.



There are five main categories of delivery of care:

 Fissure sealing

 Small restorations: gentle excavation/slow speed removal of caries without

local anaesthetic.

 Local anaesthetic: topical analgesia and an injection of local analgesia

often rephrased as ‘jungle juice/sleepy juice’ to avoid the emotive word ‘injection’.

 Sedation: for children, inhalation sedation (nitrous oxide/oxygen) is

especially useful for patients who are old enough to communicate well with the dentist, have had some previous experience of dental treatment with local analgesia and wish to cooperate but are too anxious to do so without extra help.

 General anaesthesia: GA allows all the dental treatment to be carried out in

one visit. All other modalities should be considered first and GA should only be employed when other methods of delivery are deemed inappropriate. This is because all general anaesthetics carry risks, which include (extremely rarely) possible death. In a healthy person, the risk of death under general anaesthesia is estimated to be about three in one million.



Treatment Plan

The treatment plan details exactly how and in what order planned care will be delivered. For treatment involving several visits, the treatment plan should be outline visit by visit. Each visit should have a preventive and restorative component. This is because prevention is aimed at treating the causes of dental disease whilst restoration is merely aimed at repairing the damage. Usually, only one or two





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




preventive messages are delivered at each visit so the family are not overloaded with advice.



The restorative/operative component is usually started in the maxillary arch, which is considered to be more straightforward to anaesthetise than the mandibular arch. At each subsequent visit a different quadrant is anaesthetised and all the operative work including restorations, fissure sealants and extractions are carried out to avoid repeated administration of local analgesia in the same area.



Here is an example of a treatment plan for the 7-year-old patient mentioned above, who has opted to have local analgesia.



Restorative Component Preventive Component



Visit One History Examination, Diet sheet given

Bitewing radiographs &

Plaque score & OHI

OPT, Diagnosis Treatment

plan. Photographs



Visit Two Introduction to dentistry Diet sheet collected

Prophylaxis Plaque score – positive

reinforcement of any

Dress open cavities with

improvement of oral

temporary restorations

hygiene since last visit +/-

(Glass ionomer eg Fuji IX)

further OHI

Show LA & RD in

preparation for next visit



Visit Three Introduction to LA & RD Discussion of diet analysis

55 (O) Composite

Restoration

16, 54 Fissure sealant





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Visit Four LA & RD Check level of fluoride (in

ppm) in toothpaste. If

65 Pulpotomy & SSC

inappropriate, advise

26, 64 Fissure sealant appropriate level of fluoride

and instruct correct amount

of toothpaste to use.

Parents to assist with

brushing until approx age 8,

child to spit toothpaste out

but not rinse mouth after

brushing



Visit Five Consent for extraction of 74 Check how patient is getting

on with new toothpaste.

LA&RD

Duraphat (to mesial

75 Pulpotomy & SSC surfaces of E’s) 74 Extraction

36 Fissure sealant



Visit Six Consent for extraction of 84 Plaque score & OHI

LA & RD Diet and Fluoride (check

that advice given has been

85 Pulpotomy & SSC

adopted)

84 Extraction

Check fissure sealants are

46 Fissure sealant intact Photographs



Consider recall Interval Next oral health review: 3 depending on caries risk months assessment Next Bitewings: 1 year

Monitor developing

malocclusion (Reassess

occlusion in 1 year)



This is a good working plan. It allows you and the parents to visualise exactly how treatment will progress, how long it will take and how the eventual goal will be achieved. It is not set in stone however and you may have to be flexible if changes occur, for example in the behaviour of the child.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Treatment Planning in Special Circumstances

It can be helpful to use a proforma to collect information in certain circumstances which you wouldn’t collect routinely. Examples of departmental proformas include:

 GA referral proforma

 Trauma form profoma

 First permanent molar clinical form analysis

 Diet analysis proforma



Recommended Reading



 Prevention and Management of Dental Caries in Children

Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme (SDCEP) Currently updating its guidance

 Delivering better oral health: an evidence-based toolkit for prevention

Third Edition updated 2017

 FGDP Selection Criteria for Dental Radiology

Third Edition 2015

Radiographs in Dental Caries Diagnosis

Radiographs in Developing Dentition





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Behaviour Management



Helping Children to Accept Dentistry

Children’s dentistry can be a challenge for the patient, the dentist and the other members of the dental team. To be successful the dentist must establish a relationship based on trust with the child and accompanying adult to ensure compliance with preventive regimes and allow treatment to occur (the treatment alliance). The way a dental professional interacts and communicates with the child patient and their parents will have a major influence on the success of any clinical or preventive care.



In order to deliver high quality dentistry to a child whilst also developing a positive attitude towards dental health, the dentist should have a good understanding of the factors which might affect the behaviour of children in the dental setting. A working knowledge of strategies to minimise anxiety and make positive behaviour more likely is also essential, as is a grasp of how best to deal with anxiety or negative behaviour.



Dental treatment frequently involves the delivery of invasive surgical treatment using sharp, high-speed cutting instruments in one of the most personal and sensitive parts of the body. Despite this, it is quite possible for the majority of young children to accept high quality dentistry whilst they are awake, if it is delivered in an appropriate way. For those who can’t, other strategies such as sedation or general anaesthesia are available.



Factors which may Influence Anxiety and Behaviour

There are many factors which might lead to a patient becoming anxious during dental treatment. Some of these are outside the dentist’s direct control, and others relate to things which happen within the dental environment itself.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Factors outside of the Dental Setting

In common with many new experiences in life, when a child first attends the dentist, uncertainty about what is going to happen can lead to anxiety. Such feelings can be made worse by:

 The attitudes towards dentistry of others around the child; this includes peers,

siblings, and especially parents

 Negative portrayals of dentistry in the media  Previous medical and dental experience  Communication or learning difficulties (for example, if they have impaired

hearing or eyesight, or other special needs)



During medical history taking, you should ask not only about prior medical, surgical and dental treatments, but you should also ask the parent how well they felt the child coped with them. You should also ask their child about their own experiences.



Factors within the Dental Setting

The dental surgery is a highly specialised environment and contains many sights, smells and sounds which are outside a child’s previous experience, and as a result, may contribute to anxiety. The dental surgery environment can be made less threatening by:

 Light, warm coloured décor

 Child orientated pictures

 A few strategically placed toys

 Cabinetry design which allows the majority of equipment to be hidden from

view

 The use of good quality motors and hand pieces which minimise sound and

vibration



The appearance of the dentist and the dental staff may also influence anxiety. Interestingly, the specific attire worn by the dentist, e.g. the colour and design of the coat, whether the dentist wears a collar and tie or an open neck etc., does not seem





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




to be as important as general neatness and apparent cleanliness. Attention to personal hygiene is important; bad breath can be an inadvertent cause of failure of co-operation! Protective equipment, such as goggles and face masks, may raise anxiety if worn at initial contact, but studies suggest that if these are put on after the child has initially met the dentist they have less influence on subsequent behaviour than one might expect.



The manner with which the dentist and other dental staff speak to and communicate with the child and parents is critical. Dentists with a calm, caring and empathic approach are more likely to be able to successfully manage a potentially anxious child.



Positive behaviour can be enhanced by:

 Finding out what the child likes to be called and then greeting the child by that

name

 Giving clear, direct instructions, and avoiding ‘open’ questions, e.g. “Okay,

John, jump up into the chair, please,” is much better than, “Okay, John. Would you like to jump in my chair now, please?”

 Questioning of feelings during procedures, e.g. “How does that feel? Does

that feel okay?”

 Giving feedback about the child’s behaviour, e.g. “Oh, I like the way you’re

helping me by opening your mouth. That’s the biggest, widest mouth I’ve seen all day!”

 Physical contact, such as placing a hand on a shoulder or holding a child’s

hand during or after a particularly difficult procedure

 Maintaining good eye contact with the child when communicating with them  Giving them a hand mirror so they can see what is happening





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




The following usually promote negative or inappropriate behaviour and may increase anxiety (i.e. examples of what NOT to do):

 Unsolicited reassurance, for example, “Don’t worry, this isn’t going to hurt,”

can inadvertently pass on the message, “I am worried that this next bit might hurt you, so I feel I need to reassure you that it won’t.”

 Criticism, ridicule and put-downs are all highly ineffective. Calm and clear

explanations about why a particular behaviour is inappropriate and the type of behaviour that would be better are far more effective.

 Non-dental chitchat with a third person, such as the dental nurse, or a parent



Childrenese

It is important, when speaking to children, especially the very young, to use words and terms to which they can relate. Paediatric dentists often call this “childrenese.” The key features of effective “childrenese” are that the terms used for the various pieces of dental equipment and procedures are constructed from words which are probably already in the child’s vocabulary and which carry little or no negative connotations.



"Childrenese" terms for dental equipment can include:



buzzy bee slow handpiece/electric

toothbrush

whizzy brush air rotor

magic wind triplespray/inhalation

sedation

jungle juice or sleepy local anaesthetic juice

spray your teeth off to giving a local anaesthetic sleep





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




rubber rubber dam raincoat/umbrella

clip or button/tooth ring rubber dam clamp

Hoover suction

(Based on Fayle & Crawford, 1997)



The Role of the Parent

The parents’ behaviour and their attitude towards dentistry can have a key effect on their child’s subsequent behaviour in the dental setting. Because of this, effective communication with parents and providing specific information to them about their role during dental treatment can be of critical importance. However, parents who frequently interrupt communication between the child and the dentist, either with non-dental chitchat or with attempts to give their child instructions or encouragement, can cause distraction and confusion, which lead to an increased probability of disruptive behaviour in the child. Such interventions are often very genuine attempts to offer support to the child, but frequently reflect the parents’ own anxieties about dental treatment.



Even though parents may feel they are doing their best to disguise such feelings, children are very perceptive to both verbal and non-verbal clues of suppressed anxiety exhibited by their parents. It is therefore important to ensure that the parents clearly understand their role in the dental surgery. This was most clearly explained by Frankel7 forty years ago: “The presence of a passively-observing mother can be an aid to the child. This can be accomplished if the mother is motivated positively, is instructed explicitly, and co-operates willingly in the role of a ‘silent helper’”. In addition, having the parent in the surgery helps to avoid any misunderstanding should the child start to become upset during dental treatment. It also allows the dentist to involve the parent in decisions about how best to proceed should problems start to occur.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Basic Behaviour Management Strategies



Tell, Show, Do

This is a basic and straightforward strategy which helps to introduce a new experience whilst helping to minimise the “fear of the unknown”. It was first described by Addlestone in the 1950’s and reflects how we learn about many new experiences during life. As the title suggests, the first stage – “tell” – is to provide a description of what is about to happen. During the second stage – “show” – a demonstration of the procedure is given, and this is followed by the final stage – “do” – where the procedure is actually carried out. An example of how “tell, show, do” might be used to introduce a dental prophylaxis is given below:



 Tell: describe what is about to happen  Show: demonstrate the procedure  Do: do it!

Example:

 “We are going to polish your teeth with the buzzy brush.”  “Here is the buzzy brush. See how it goes round and round and tickles your

finger.”

 “Now I am going to tickle your teeth with the buzzy brush.”



Behaviour Shaping and Reinforcement

Behaviour shaping has been described as “developing appropriate behaviour by reinforcing successive approximations to the desired behaviour until the desired behaviour is achieved”. As part of this process, we also want to discourage behaviour that is not conducive to what we are trying to achieve.



The process of behaviour-shaping usually involves a basic “tell, show, do” approach, but with desired behaviour being encouraged, or “reinforced” by strategies such as praise and approval, and with undesired behaviour being made less likely to occur, or “extinguished” by discouraging or ignoring it. The key psychological principle of





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




this type of strategy is the phenomenon of “reinforcement”, which is where a pattern of behaviour is strengthened in such a way that it increases the probability of that behaviour being displayed again in the future. Reinforcements work best if they occur immediately after the behaviour that we wish to reinforce.



Effective reinforcements include:

 Social interactions, such as praise and approval (these are the most effective)

 Stickers toys, gifts etc. (less effective and less specific)

 Access to TV, films, activities etc. (not usually under our direct control)



Enhancing Control

It can be helpful to give the child a degree of control over the continuation of each phase of treatment (e.g. cavity preparation) using a stop signal. An example of such a signal might be to instruct the child to raise their hand. The stop signal should be practised first and it is important that the dentist responds quickly when it is used. However, do not allow the child to inappropriately use such signals to try and delay progress.



Distraction

Distraction is where the attention is drawn to a totally different sensation or action in order to divert attention from a potentially stress-inducing procedure. Whilst it is important not to breach trust by deliberately trying to deceive a child, distraction of attention from one thing to another can be useful. For example, drawing attention to the sensation of lip pulling during local anaesthetic needle penetration.



Modelling

Modelling is where the child observes behaviour exhibited by another patient - “the model” – which increases the likelihood of the observed behaviour being adopted as an appropriate code of behaviour by the observer. This works best when the “model” is someone to whom the child can relate fairly closely, e.g. a sibling or a friend of a similar age.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





Some DO’s and DONTs

 Arrive at the clinic early – don’t be late!

 Be organised – check your treatment plan beforehand. Make sure you know

why the patient is here and what is planned for today’s visit

 Get everything prepared – think the procedure through and make sure you

have all necessary equipment and materials (avoid opening sterile instruments until the patient has arrived)

 Make a comprehensive treatment plan (“Dentists don’t usually plan to fail –

but they may fail to plan”)

 Communicate effectively with both children and their parents/accompanying

adults.

 Focus on success/appropriate behaviour and reinforce this

 Set clear, easily achievable goals for both the patient and yourself – try to

make each visit a “success”. Always end the appointment by focussing on what has been achieved (rather than what hasn’t).

 Don’t make promises (or threats) you cannot keep

 Good records to ensure progress is accurately monitored

 Do not use put downs/ridicule

 The very last thing you should record in the notes should be what the plan is

for the next visit whilst it is clear in your mind.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Recommended Reading

 Fayle S and Tahmassebi J.F (2003) Approaches to behaviour management in

children’s dentistry. Dental Update 30; 294-298.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Prevention of Dental Caries



Introduction

Dental caries is a preventable disease. Prevention of caries underpins all dental care provided to children. It is therefore important to institute effective preventive measures at treatment planning prior to commencing any restorative work (other than emergency and stabilising procedures).



The mainstay of preventive measures includes:

1. Tooth brushing with fluoride toothpaste

2. Dietary advice

3. Use of fluorides

4. Fissure sealants

5. Regular dental checks with appropriate radiographs



All these measures need to be co-ordinated and supervised by the dental team and reinforced with good patient and parental motivation. Collaboration with the wider health and social care team (e.g. health visitor, school nurse, community dental service) should be considered for children assessed as high risk.



Toothbrushing with Fluoride Toothpaste Caries and periodontal disease can both be reduced by regular toothbrushing with fluoride toothpaste. The fluoride in the toothpaste is the important element to control caries, whilst the physical removal of plaque is the important element of toothbrushing to control periodontal disease.



Principles of Toothbrushing

Empathise with the parent/carer how difficult it can be with small children to brush properly; nevertheless give advice and reinforce the importance of following it.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Timing of brushing:

 Brush as soon as the first primary tooth erupts

- A damp cotton flannel or face cloth on a finger can be used to remove

the plaque in infants.

 Brush twice daily as a minimum (last thing at night before bed and at one

other time each day)

- Some parents/carers find it difficult to get the child to brush in the

morning especially during school term time. Stress the importance of night brushing and find time to brush one other time when more co-operation can be obtained from the child.

- A simple message for patients is ‘brush your teeth first thing in the

morning and last thing at night’.



Fluoride toothpaste:

 Use the correct amount of toothpaste with age appropriate fluoride

concentration

- 0-3 years old: small smear of toothpaste, >1,000ppm fluoride - 3-6 years old: pea-sized toothpaste, >1,000ppm fluoride - 0-6 years old with high caries risk: small smear/pea-sized, 1,350-

1,500ppm fluoride

- >7 years old: 1,350-1,500ppm fluoride





Brushing technique:



 ‘Spit, don’t rinse’

- Rinsing with water or mouthwash (even fluoride rinses) immediately

after toothbrushing will wash away the concentrated fluoride in the





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




remaining toothpaste, thus diluting it and reducing its preventive effects.

 Help and supervision by an adult

- Help children brush until they are at least 7 years old. Children do not

have the manual dexterity to brush their teeth effectively until they can tie their own shoelaces (approximately 7 years old).

- Continue to supervise children older than 7 years old until confident in

their brushing habits.

- Children must be discouraged from eating or licking toothpaste.

 Emphasise the need to be systematic to clean all tooth surfaces

- Thorough cleaning should take at least 2 minutes.

 Teach the child to recognise the ‘bristle sound’ (ask them to listen for a ‘shh-shh

sound).

 When 6s and 7s are only partially erupted, show the child and parent/carer how

brushing in line with the arch can miss the vulnerable occlusal surfaces of these teeth. Emphasise the need to brush the occlusal surface from the side of the mouth.

 Another area frequently missed is the lower incisor labial surfaces. The labial

gingival margin can be a sensitive area to brush especially for patients with a high fraenulum attachment. It may be necessary to retract the patient’s lip to highlight plaque retention and gingival inflammation along the gum line.



Types of brushes:

While there is evidence that some powered toothbrushes (with a rotation/oscillation action) can be more effective than manual toothbrushes, more important is that the brush, manual or powered, is used effectively twice daily.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Toothbrushing Aids

Plaque disclosing agents:





 Use plaque disclosing agents to show the patient plaque deposits on their



teeth.

 Let the patient brush their teeth and attempt to remove all the staining in order

to learn the best brushing technique. Ask for parent/carer’s help if needed depending on child’s age.

 Record plaque free score (PFS) in notes and try to set an achievable target as

close to 100% as possible.

 Advise on the use of disclosing tablets at home as a learning tool. For the first

week, advise patient to disclose first, then brush. After one week, brush first, and then disclose in order to identify areas that are being missed.



Toothbrushing charts:

 Child or parent/carer can use this to record each time the child’s teeth are

brushed as a reminder about brushing frequency.

 This can also serve as a reward chart to motivate the child to brush.



Toothbrushing timer:

 A timer might help motivate the child to ensure thorough brushing.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 There are lots of applications available on smart technology nowadays to

make brushing fun and help children learn through play.





Dietary Advice

Achieving changes in dietary habits is extremely difficult; therefore advice must be individual, practical and realistic. It should not be all negative, and positive alternatives should be identified. Advising parents to completely stop their children from eating sugary food is not practical. The main dietary message to caries prevention is to reduce the frequency and amount of sugary food and drinks.



Dietary advice can be given at 2 levels: basic advice and diet analysis.



Basic Advice

Basic advice should be given to every patient. This especially applies to parents of young children who need to be given advice at the appropriate age of the child. Basic advice can include:

 Restrict sugary food and drinks to no more than 4 occasions per day.

- However, provided patients are brushing twice daily with a fluoride

toothpaste, they should safely be able to have 5 meal moments per





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




day (Duggal et al., 2001), for example, 3 main meals and maximum 2 snacks.

- Confining sugary food and drinks to meal times reduces the time that

teeth are exposed to acid attack. Therefore, it is advisable to have any sugary treats as a pudding right after the main meals.

- ‘Grazing’ sugary food between meals and sipping soft drinks containing

sugar/acid over prolonged periods should be discouraged.

 Snack on sugar-free snacks such as fresh whole fruits (apple, banana,

grapes), vegetable sticks (carrot, peppers, cucumber), breadsticks and cheese.

- Although fruit does contain natural sugars, at normal consumption

levels there is no evidence that it increases caries risk.

 Drink only still and non-flavoured water or milk between meals.

- Cow’s milk is non-cariogenic. - Sweetened/flavoured milk and soy formula milk contain high level of

added sugar.

- Fruit juices contain concentrated levels of sugars and acids.

 Give only water or milk in feeding bottles.

- From 6 months onwards infants should be introduced to drinking from a

free-flow cup.

- From 1 year onwards feeding from a bottle should be discouraged.

 Avoid adding sugar to weaning foods or drinks.

 Be aware of hidden sugars in some foods and the acid content of drinks.

- Many processed foods contain high levels of sugar and acid. For

example, a glass of fruit smoothie contains a much higher concentration of sugar and acid than a portion of its whole fruit counterpart.

 Do not eat or drink after brushing at night.



Diet Analysis

Diet analysis involves a more thorough analysis of the diet of children with increased risk of caries using the 3-day diet diary record.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 The child or parent/carer keeps a record of all food and drink consumed over

a 3-day period, with at least one of the days being at the weekend. The diary is collected on the subsequent visit. Analysis is made of the diary and advice offered as necessary on the following visit.

 During analysis of the diet diary, it is essential to assess the overall pattern of

eating to establish the following information:

- The number of intakes of food and drinks per day - The number of intakes that contain added sugars and how many were

consumed between normal mealtimes

- Whether any intakes containing sugars were taken within one hour of

bedtime (when the caries protective effects of saliva are reduced)

 The use of a diet diary is a good way of helping parents/carers to identify the

frequency and amount of sugary intake.

 It is also a good opportunity for the dental team to provide dietary advice for

general health.



The Eatwell Guide:

The Eatwell Guide is a key policy tool that defines the government’s recommendations on a healthy diet.



It makes healthy eating easier to understand by giving a visual representation of the types and proportions of foods needed for a healthy, balanced diet.



The two most important elements of a healthy diet are:

 Eating the right amount of food relative to how active a person is

 Eating a range of foods in line with the Eatwell Guide





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





Key messages for a healthier diet include:

 Base meals on starchy foods

 Eat lots of fruit and vegetables

 Eat more fish

 Cut down on saturated fat

 Cut down on the amount and frequency of sugar intake

 Eat less salt

 Drink plenty of water



The Eatwell Guide is a useful tool in helping parents/carers with diet modification. It provides a basis for identifying heathy alternatives.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Use of Fluorides

The principle mode of action of fluoride in caries prevention is the topical effect of its soluble state, in saliva, at the plaque/enamel interface. It inhibits demineralisation and enhances remineralisation by forming fluoroapatite. The incorporation of fluoride (as fluoroapatite) into the enamel will decrease its solubility and thus increase its resistance to caries. Even low levels of fluoride ion in the oral fluid (0.01ppm) have been found to be effective in preventing the dissolution of enamel.



In the past, it was thought that the systemic action of fluoride was important for caries prevention. It is now recognised that the incorporation of systemic fluoride into developing (unerupted) enamel has a lesser role in increasing enamel resistance. It is the activity of the fluoride ion in the oral fluid that is important in reducing the solubility of the enamel rather than a high content of fluoride in the enamel.



Therefore, a constant supply of low levels of intra-oral fluoride, particularly at the plaque/enamel interface, and in saliva, is of most benefit in caries prevention.



There are 3 main ways fluoride can be delivered:

1. Community fluoridation

2. Topical fluorides for home use

3. Professionally applied fluoride



Community Fluoridation

There are 3 ways to offer fluoride on a community-wide basis: water, milk and salt.

 Water fluoridation: currently approximately 10% of England’s population benefit

from water fluoridation, either naturally or artificially. The West Midlands is the most extensively fluoridated area, followed by the North East of England. Information on fluoride levels in water can be obtained from the local water





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




supplier. This is particularly important where additional fluoride is being considered for young children.

 Milk fluoridation: there are a few schemes in England which supply children with

fluoridated milk at school managed by The Borrow Milk Foundation, Portsmouth. They are provided in areas which are not fluoridated and where levels of caries are high. Children should not take part if they are receiving additional fluoride.

 Salt fluoridation: Switzerland was the first nation to pioneer salt fluoridation and it

is now available in Spain, Hungary, France and parts of Brazil. There is limited research on its absolute effectiveness, especially now that fluoride toothpaste is readily available and in some areas, fluoridated water.



Topical Fluorides for Home Use

Fluoride toothpastes:

 Fluoride is added to toothpaste in one of the following forms:

- Sodium fluoride

- Sodium monofluorophosphate (MFP)

- Stannous/amine fluoride

 Parents/carers should be advised and shown to read the labels of over-the-counter

toothpastes to look for the parts per million of fluoride (ppmF) in the toothpaste.

 National guideline regarding the correct amount and appropriate concentration of

over-the-counter toothpaste has been mentioned in the toothbrushing section earlier and should be followed.

 For older children and young adults with high caries risk (those with active caries,

orthodontic appliances, highly cariogenic diet and on medication), high concentration fluoride toothpaste can be prescribed:

- 10+ years old: 2,800ppm sodium fluoride (0.619%DPF) - 16+ years old: 5,000ppm sodium fluoride (1.1% DPF)

 For people who are sensitive to strong flavours in toothpaste or with special needs,

OraNurse can be recommended. This is an unflavoured and non-foaming toothpaste with 1,450ppm sodium fluoride suitable for 4+ years old.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Fluoride mouthrinses:

 Two types of rinses are available:

- Daily: 0.05% w/w neutral sodium fluoride (225ppmF) - Weekly: 0.2% w/w neutral sodium fluoride (900ppmF)





 For those 8+ years old with high caries risk, prescribe daily fluoride rinse.

 The daily rinse is recommended as it is simpler to rinse on a regular basis than

trying to remember to use a product just once a week. Moreover, maintaining a low level of fluoride in the mouth on a daily basis fits in with our understanding of the mode of action of fluoride on the remineralisation of enamel.

 Use the rinse at a different time to brushing with a fluoride toothpaste so that the

number of fluoride exposures increases. The effect of toothbrushing and rinsing with fluoride has been shown to be additive.

 All orthodontic patients should be using a daily fluoride rinse to minimise the risk of

demineralisation and white spot lesions.

 Other groups of patients who will benefit from the prescription of a daily fluoride

rinse are:

- Patients with hyposalivation due to medication or those with congenital

absence of the major salivary glands

- Children with medical problems for whom caries could be a serious

problem, eg cardiac patients, those with bleeding disorders.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Children under 8 years of age (before eruption of the permanent incisors) should

not be recommended to use fluoride mouth rinse due to the increased risk of swallowing the product and this may cause fluorosis.



Tooth Mousse:

(Casein phosphopeptide-amorphous calcium phosphate crème- CPP-ACP/Tooth Mousse Plus (CPP-ACPF) and known as MI paste and MIPlus in the USA)





 CPP-ACP and CPP-ACPF are available as crème (Tooth Mousse and Tooth

Mousse Plus) for topical application at home.

 CPP-ACPF releases fluoride, calcium and phosphate ions for local remineralisation

of enamel.

 These are to be applied to surfaces at risk of caries, erosion or with white spot

lesions.

 The crème is applied to teeth after brushing by smearing across tooth surfaces

with a clean finger or cotton-bud. The crème should not be rinsed out.

 Tooth Mousse Plus contains 900ppmF and should not be used by children 6 years

and under.

 The crème is also contraindicated in people with milk protein (casein) allergy.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Professionally Applied Fluoride

Fluoride varnish:





 Fluoride varnish is one of the best options for increasing the availability of topical

fluoride, regardless of the levels of fluoride in the water supply.

 Dental nurses can be trained (in accordance to Primary Care Commissioning

guidance) to apply fluoride varnish to the prescription of dentists. This use of skill mix can assist a practice to become more preventively orientated.

 Duraphat (2.2% sodium fluoride, 22,600ppmF) is one of the readily available

varnishes in the UK. This has a very high fluoride concentration and is supplied in a small tube.

 Great care should be taken to use it sparingly on young children to avoid toxicity.

 The manufacturer’s recommended dose for children:

- 2-5 years old (primary dentition): 0.25ml - >6 years old (mixed dentition): 0.40ml - Diagram below shows diameter of ‘blob’ when dispensed on a paper pad:



11mm 13mm



0.25ml 0.40ml





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 While a thorough prophylaxis is not essential prior to application, removal of gross

plaque is advised. Teeth should then be dried with cotton wool rolls or a triple syringe. The varnish should be carefully applied with a microbrush to pits, fissures and approximal surfaces of primary and permanent teeth.

 The patient should be advised to avoid eating, drinking and rinsing out for 30

minutes and eat only soft food in the following 4 hours.

 Brushing can recommence on the day following application.

 The use of Duraphat (which contains colophony) is contraindicated in children with

a history of allergic episodes requiring hospitalisation due to severe asthma or allergy, or who are allergic to sticking plaster. It is also contraindicated in patients with ulcerative gingivitis and stomatitis. In these cases, alternative fluoride varnishes without colophony such as Clinpro and Fluor Protector or other age-appropriate fluoride preparations (e.g. mouthrinse or high fluoride toothpaste) should be used or considered.

 Fluoride varnish can be applied twice per year to children 3 years and above. For

all children at increased risk of caries, it can be applied two or more times per year, up to a maximum of 4 times per year.



When deciding on which fluoride preparation to use, the following factors should be considered:

 The water supply in the area /the practice location.

 The school /nursery the child is attending – is the child receiving school milk with

fluoridation or on the school fluoride varnish programme provided by the community dental team?

 Caries risk of the child based on medical, dental and social history.

 The expected child/parent motivation and compliance.



Each individual patient will require a ‘tailor-made’ fluoride regime, and the dentist will need to use his/her experience and knowledge of each patient in formulating one.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Fissure Sealants

Sealants are materials applied to the pits and fissures of teeth in order to obliterate and hence remove the sheltered environment in which caries may thrive.

Initially developed to prevent caries, their use has been developed further and now has a place in the treatment of caries.

For sealants to be used effectively, their use should be targeted. Below is a summary of patient and tooth selection criteria for fissure sealants:



Patient selection:

 Children with special needs- medically compromised, physically/mentally disabled,

learning difficulties, disadvantaged social background.

 Children with extensive caries in their primary teeth should have all permanent

molars sealed as soon as possible after eruption.

 Children with caries-free primary dentitions do not need to have first permanent

molars sealed routinely. These teeth should be reviewed at regular intervals.



Tooth selection:

 Apart from occlusal surfaces of permanent molars, other surfaces which should not

be neglected are: cingulum pits of upper incisors, buccal pits of lower molars and palatal pits of upper molars.

 Sealants should be applied as soon as the selected tooth has erupted sufficiently.

 Any child with occlusal caries in one first permanent molar should have the others

sound first permanent molars sealed.

 Any child with occlusal caries in one or more first permanent molars should have

the second permanent molars sealed.



Fissure Sealing Technique

The technique for placement of sealants is relatively simple but is technique sensitive. Salivary contamination of as little as half a second can affect the bond and therefore the retention of the sealant. The stages of placing a fissure sealant are detailed below:

 Clean the tooth





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




- Prophylaxis before etching does not enhance retention, but the tooth does

need to be free from obvious debris.

- The tooth can be cleaned by wiping with cotton wool pledget, or brushing

with a toothbrush or a bristle brush without prophy paste.

- Prophy paste should be avoided as these are retained in the depths of the

fissures preventing penetration of the resin.

 Isolate the tooth

- Isolation is critical to successful sealant application. - Operator and assistant must act as a team. It is impossible for single

operators to apply sealant effectively.

- Cotton wool rolls and suction are effective means of isolation. Dry guards

can be used to aid moisture control.

- Placement of rubber dam is frequently not possible because of the stage of

eruption of the tooth or level of co-operation of the child. It would be inappropriate to delay sealant application to allow further eruption to permit application of rubber dam. The application of sealant is a relatively non-invasive technique frequently used to acclimatise a child. It is difficult to justify the use of local anaesthetics and clamps for the majority of patients, on both clinical and economical grounds.

 Etch the tooth surface

- Apply etch (37% phosphoric acid) for 20-30 seconds

 Wash and dry the tooth surface, maintaining isolation

 Apply the sealant

- Ensure that resin flows without air inclusions to cover approximately 1/3 of

the incline of the cusp.

 Light cure the sealant

 Check the sealant

- Wipe the air-inhibited layer from the surface of the sealant- children find the

taste distressing

- Check the retention of the sealant and for flash with a probe



Existing sealants should be checked at every recall visit for wear and leakage. Worn sealants should be ‘topped up’ if the child is still at increased risk of caries.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Using Glass Ionomer Cement (GIC) as a Sealant Material

 Placing resin sealant can be difficult on a partially erupted tooth, or with a child

whose co-operation is limited and/or moisture control is poor.

 High viscosity, self-cured GIC can be used as a sealant material. However, the

retention rates of this material are poor over the long term, so it should be used as a temporary measure only. GIC sealants achieve successful caries prevention by releasing fluoride even when partially lost.

 The ‘press finger’ technique can be deployed for a child who is not able to tolerate

the resin sealant procedure.



Sealing over Caries

 Since the development of sealants there has been a question regarding the effect

of sealing over caries, the concern being that caries will progress unidentified under the sealant. A number of trials have examined this by actively sealing over caries, all have shown that sealants arrest or slow the rate of caries progression.

 ‘If in doubt, seal’. However, this should be followed by regular clinical and

radiographic monitoring until caries status is confirmed.

 One instance where actively sealing over caries is to be recommended is in the

pre-cooperative child where the placement of sealant may help acclimatise the child, with the added benefit of controlling the caries, until a definitive restoration can be placed. This can also be achieved with a well-placed temporary restoration to seal a cavitated lesion.



Treatment Planning for Caries Prevention

 The above summarises the various methods of caries prevention.

 Implementing a preventive regime requires a behaviour change of the patient

and/or parent. Therefore, patients not only need to be imparted with the appropriate knowledge, but motivated and equipped with the skills to affect and maintain the change.

 It is important to identify the support network of the child. The family’s ability and

attitude towards maintaining oral health and motivation to take responsible for it is crucial in affecting and maintaining change.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Communication is key in the delivery of preventive messages:

- Information delivered should be clear, concise, evidence-based and

consistent with health messages delivered by other health professionals.

- Advice should be personalised and tailored to the individu al’s

circumstances.

- Give positive advice rather than prohibitive instructions. - Listen to the patient and let them explain themselves. - Use open questions and an encouraging tone.

- Consider the impact of non-verbal communication e.g. facial expressions,

body posture and eye contact.

 Forming an action plan increases the likelihood of behaviour change. Therefore, it

is important to set goals which are specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and timely for the patient.

 Children thrive on rewards and praises, so it is important to identify suitable and

appropriate rewards for any progress achieved as this helps maintain motivation.

 There are various supporting tools that can be used to assist and act as a check

list for the delivery of preventive care:

- The Department of Health, ‘Delivering Better Oral Health: An Evidence-

Based Toolkit for Prevention’ has a summary guidance on caries prevention regime based on children’s age and caries risk.

- The Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness Programme, Appendix 5 contains

some useful tools such as: The Care Checklist, the Preventive Log and the Caries Prevention Reminder by Age.

- The Cariogram, developed in Malmo, Sweden, is a graphical picture,

illustrating in an interactive way, the individual’s/patient’s caries risk. A unique PC software (can be downloaded free) that draws the Cariogram can be used as an analytical tool to aid (but cannot replace the professional judgement of dental health personnel) in decision-making when planning prevention.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Recommended Reading

 Department of Health (2014) Delivering Better Oral Health: An evidence-

based toolkit for prevention (Third edition)

 Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network (2014) SIGN 138 Dental interventions to

prevent caries in children

 Scottish dental clinical effectiveness programme (2010) Prevention and

Management of Dental Caries in Children, Dental Clinical Guidance

 Toumba K.J, Tahmassebi J.F and Balmer R (2003) Clinical Prevention: The Role

of the General Dental Practitioner. Dental Update 30: 503-510

 European academy of paediatric dentistry (2004)

Guidelines for the use of pit and fissure sealants





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Local Analgesia



Introduction



Local analgesia should be used routinely in all age groups. Students are encouraged to always use analgesia where appropriate so that they quickly become adept and confident in its use. Age of the patient should not be a contraindication for its use, even for mandibular blocks in the very young when the "Rule of 10” should be used. The “Rule of 10” involves the tooth which requires anaesthetis being assigned a number ranging from 1-5 according to its location in the dental arch (1 = incisor, 2 = second primary molar). This number is then added to the age of the child; if the overall total is greater than 10, an IDB is likely to be more effective than an infiltration.



Achieving satisfactory analgesia in children takes a long time. Time should be spent explaining the procedure in terms the child can understand. Topical anaesthetic is routinely applied and left for several minutes to work covered with a cotton wool roll to avoid anaesthetising the whole mouth. Infiltrations should be given as slowly and superficially as possible. Buccal mucosa should be completely anaesthetized before giving supplementary injections such as interpapillaries and intraligamentary. ID blocks should also be given slowly.



During local anaesthetic administration the student must keep up a constant level of praise and encouragement for the child. This should be done calmly and gently in order to put the child at ease. Administration of local anaesthetic solution must be delivered with the assistance of a nurse or colleague.



Intra-oral Topical Anaesthetic Agents

Topical anaesthetic agents can anaesthetise a 2-3 mm depth of the surface of the intra-oral mucosa. However, the success of topical anaesthesia depends on the technique and duration of application. The area of application should be dried, and the topical anaesthetic should be applied over a limited area and for several minutes.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




An effective method of application is to spread some cream on the end of a cotton bud and hold it in the mouth for several minutes while using the small suction to remove any excess.





Local Anaesthetics

There are two general types of local anaesthetic chemical formulations: esters (eg, procaine, benzocaine, tetracaine); and amides (eg, lidocaine, mepivacaine, prilocaine, articaine). Local anaesthetics are vasodilators, therefore, vasoconstrictors such as epinephrine are added to local anaesthetics to constrict blood vessels in the area of injection. This lowers the rate of absorption of the local anaesthetic into the blood stream, thereby lowering the risk of toxicity and prolonging the anaesthetic action in the area.



Commonly used local anaesthetics

 Lignocaine 2% with 1:80 000 epinerphrine

 Articaine 4% with 1:100 000 epinephrine

 Prilocaine 3% with felypressin



Lignocaine 2% with epinephrine remains the most commonly used anaesthetic solution in dentistry. However in the last few years the use of articaine has increased. There is some limited evidence that in young children infiltration with 4% articaine gives as profound analgesia as IDB with lignocaine for restoration of mandibular posterior teeth, including for pulp therapy in primary molars. ARTICAINE SHOULD NEVER BE USED FOR AN IDB.



In paediatric dentistry, the dental professional should be aware of proper dosage of local anaesthetic (based on weight) to minimize the chance of toxicity and the prolonged duration of anaesthesia, which can lead to accidental lip, tongue, or soft tissue trauma. The table below describes the maximum dosages of the most commonly used local anaesthetic solutions.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Maximum Dosages of Local Anaesthetic Solutions



Solution Max dose Max dose by age of child (mls)



1yr (10kg) 3yrs (15kg) 5yrs (20kg)



2%lignocaine/1:80,000 adrenaline 4.4 mg/kg 2.2 3.3 4.4 (20mg/ml lignocaine)





3%prilocaine/felypressin 6.6mg/kg 2.2 3.3 4.4 (30mg/ml prilocaine)





4%articaine/1:100,000 adrenaline 7 mg/kg 1.75 2.6 3.5 (40mg/ml articaine)



1 cartridge = 2.2mls



Therefore, a good rule of thumb is that, in a fit and healthy child, the maximum LA dosage is one tenth of a local anaesthetic cartridge/kg body weight.



It is essential that students learn to give local analgesia with confidence. Control of pain and discomfort are essential for good management of restorative dentistry for children.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Wand Local Anaesthetic System





The Wand is a computerised local anaesthetic system that is able to deliver local anaesthetic solution at a fixed speed. The system is made up of microprocessor control unit, disposable hand piece and foot control (activation switch).



The Wand delivers local anaesthetic at a slow and fixed rate which is thought to give rise to ‘pain free local anaesthesia’. This technique can be useful in providing anaesthesia in children who are very anxious or ‘needle phobic’.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Moisture Control



Use of Rubber Dam

Only a practitioner who is willing to discipline him/herself to the routine use of rubber dam for a given time will be able to recognise the full extent of its value as a method aiding superior results. The finest possible restorative care is thereby achieved.



Advantages of rubber dam

Rubber dam makes dental care for children easier and a higher standard of dental care can be achieved in less time than would otherwise be required. It aids the child to develop a sense of security as the "raincoat" isolates him/her from the drill, air, water and assortment of dental materials placed in the mouth. In addition, it retracts the cheeks and tongue, and assists in moisture control thus provides better access and visibility to the dentist.



The benefits of rubber dam placement can be categorised into 3 main categories as shown below:

1. Safety:

- Rubber dam prevents damages of soft tissues by rotary and hand

instruments as well as medicaments used in the provision of endodontic and other care. In addition, it greatly reduces the risk of foreign body swallowing or inhalation. Also, the risk of cross-infection to dentist and staff caused by the distribution of an aerosol of the patient`s saliva by the high-speed rotary instruments around the operating room is largely reduced by proper placement of rubber dam.



2. Benefits to the child:

- Rubber dam Isolates the operative area from the vital functions of the

patient (sight, hearing, breathing and swallowing) thus reduces the child`s anxiety and helps him/her to relax during the dental treatment.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




3. Benefits to the dentist:

- Rubber dam reduces the dentist stress by reducing the effort required by

the operator to protect the soft tissues of the mouth and airways. Moreover, it retracts the tongue and cheeks. Correctly placed rubber dam will gently pull the cheeks and tongue away from the operative area, allowing the operator a better view of the area treated. In addition, it retracts the gingival tissues gently away from the cervical margin of the tooth, making it easier to see the extent of any caries close to the margin and often bringing the cervical margin of a prepared cavity above the level of the gingival margin, thus making restoration considerably easier.



Finally, rubber dam aids in moisture control. It is the only technique that readily ensures a dry field.



The Procedure

 Children’s Rubber Dam Kits are provided on clinic. These should be set up

with holes punched and correct clamp selected and ready prior to the child coming into the surgery.

 Students should have help from a nurse or colleague when applying the dam.

 As with all dental procedures eye protection for staff and patients is essential.

 The gingivae (including palatal/lingual) MUST be anaesthetised before

applying a clamp.

 WINGLESS clamps are used and selected as follows:

- DW: primary molars/ premolars

- BW: permanent molars

- FW: partially erupted molars

 Floss MUST be tied to the clamp before application.

 The rubber dam should be pre-punched. Three overlapping holes are

adequate for single tooth isolation. 5-6 holes, overlapping in a line are required for isolation of a quadrant (trough technique)

 Clamp is applied first (WITHOUT the rubber dam)





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Note the grip on the forceps; it is held palm upwards and orientated so that it is

pointing inwards (i.e. towards the operator)





When the clamp is secure, the rubber dam is applied. The frame is then attached to



support the dam.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





In quadrant isolation, the trough is stretched to include all the required teeth and can



be secured with a widget or wizard wedge.



Be aware that saliva/moisture can accumulate beneath the dam in the mouth which may be uncomfortable for the patient. This should be removed regularly with a saliva ejector; many children can hold the saliva ejector effectively. At the end of the procedure the dam is removed by simply engaging the clamp with the forceps and removing everything (clamp, dam and frame) in one go.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Restorative Dentistry



Introduction

Despite the reduction in the extent and severity of dental caries in primary teeth in England, Wales and Northern Ireland in the last decade, large proportions of children remain affected by the disease (Child Dental Health Survey 2013, 2015). It is therefore, important for dental students to be familiar with the techniques for restoring carious primary teeth.



Inflammation of the pulp in primary molars develops at an early stage of interproximal caries attack and by the time interproximal caries involvement presents clinically with marginal ridge breakdown, pulp inflammation is quite extensive. Hence, early appropriate restorative treatment should be provided for carious primary teeth with consideration of the state of the primary pulp (Duggal et al., 2002; Kassa et al., 2009).



Two treatment approaches are available for the management of carious primary teeth in the UK; conventional and biological:

 The conventional approach consists of complete removal of carious tissue

followed by placement of a suitable filling material such as composite resin, amalgam or a stainless steel crown (SSC) with or without pulp therapy. Pulp therapy includes both pulpotomy and pulpectomy.

 The biological approach involves partial caries removal followed by placement

of a suitable filling material as seen in indirect pulp capping (IPC) or sealing dental caries in place by means of SSC and its cement (Hall technique).



Once pulp therapy has been carried out in primary molars, they become brittle and prone to fracture. In many cases a considerable amount of the crown will have been lost and it is then difficult to retain an amalgam or composite filling. Any restoration that is placed should have the same lifespan as that remaining for the tooth and should also protect the remaining tooth structure. In these cases, a stainless steel or nickel chromium crown is the treatment of choice.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Equipment

1. Burs: SSW 330 pear shaped bur is the standard bur for all cavity preps in

posterior teeth

2. Handpieces: generally small or miniature handpieces are preferrd. Air

turbine is to be used for the initial cavity preparation and then the slow speed with a round bur of the appropriate size to remove the caries.

3. Composite: as better composites become available for posterior teeth, it will

be the aim to eventually cease using amalgam. Students are encouraged to use composites for small posterior occlusal or class II restorations

4. Resin-modified GIC: can be used for teeth that are close to exfoliation

5. Matrix bands: matrix bands must be well fitted. The preferred method is to

use spot-welded bands customised for each tooth; alternatively Toffelmire or Siqveland bands may be used

6. Wedges: wedges are mandatory for packing of interproximal restorations



Cavity Preparation and Restorations

Minimal cavity preparation and composite restorations are preferred for the restoration of primary teeth. The remaining susceptible surfaces should be fissure sealed. An example of cavity design and composite restorations followed by fissure sealant of a DO cavity in 84 and MO in 85 is shown in Fig 1-Fig 4.





Fig 1 Fig 2





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





Fig 3 Fig 4





Pulp Therapy

Pulp therapy usually refers to two terms: pulpotomy and pulpectomy.



Pulpotomy in Primary Molars

A pulpotomy involves the coronal removal of the pulp tissue that is diagnosed to be inflamed or infected as a result of deep caries. This usually leaves an intact radicular pulp tissue upon which a medicament is applied before placing a coronal restoration.



Indications for a Pulpotomy:

 Large proximal carious lesion with the involvement of the marginal ridge (one-

third or more) in an otherwise restorable tooth

 A carious or mechanical exposure of vital coronal pulp tissue (Rodd et al.,

2006)





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Tooth free from radicular pulpitis diagnosed by:

- No history of spontaneous pain

- Haemorrhage from the radicular tissue is easy to control

 Absence of an abscess or a fistula

 Instances where extraction is contraindicated, e.g. haemophilia.



Contraindications for a Pulpotomy:

 Patients with certain cardiac conditions or who have a history of heart surgery;

pulpotomy is contraindicated due to the risk of precipitating bacterial endocarditis.

 Inpatients who are immuno-compromised (e.g.leukaemia) or have immuine

deficient conditions; extraction with the relevant essential precautions is usually preferred.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Stages of Pulpotomy



Administer local analgesia and apply rubber dam wherever possible (Fig 5)



Remove caries and identify the site of pulp exposure. If there is no pulp exposure

then access to the pulp chamber is made from the base of the cavity (Fig 6)



Remove roof of the pulp chamber. When the bur passes through the roof of the

chamber a “dip” is felt. Once this is felt the bur is not taken any deeper but moved

sideways to remove the roof of the pulp chamber



Remove coronal pulp with a large excavator (Fig 7)



Apply ferric sulphate on a cotton pledget, to the radicular pulp (Fig 8)



Remove the cotton pledget and check that there is no excessive haemorrhage from

the remaining pulpal tissue (Fig 9)



Fill chamber with zinc oxide eugenol cement, pressing on the zinc oxide with a

damp pledget to make sure that it is well condensed in the pulp chamber (Fig 10)



Place coronal restoration, preferably a stainless steel crown





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





Fig 5 Fig 6





Fig 7 Fig 8





Fig 9 Fig 10





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




The Hall Technique

The Hall Technique seals dental carious lesions by placing a stainless steel crown and its cement; there is no caries removal, local anaesthesia or tooth preparation. By isolating the tooth from the rest of the mouth, this should result in slowing, arresting and even reversing the carious process (Innes et al., 2006 and 2007).



Advantages of Hall Technique:

 No LA

 No tooth structure or carious tissue removal

 Quick

 (But not always pain free)



Indications for Hall Technique:

 Early to moderately advanced active occlusal and interproximal lesions in

primary molars:

- A clear band of dentine separating the carious lesion from the dental

pulp should be seen on RG (Al-Yaseen et al., 2015)

 Tooth free from radicular pulpitis diagnosed by:

- No history of spontaneous pain

- Absence of an abscess or a fistula

 No signs of carious pulp exposure

 The child’s airway can be managed safely

 Child is cooperative to place elastics

 No significant space loss due to caries





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Stages of the Hall Crown Technique



Place orthodontic separators on the child first visit to the dental clinic to create

interproximal space and help placement of the crown at the child next

appointment (Fig 11)



Place gauze inside the patient’s mouth to protect their airway



Try different crown sizes over the tooth until the correct size is found; the crown

should cover the cusps of the tooth and give the feeling of spring back when

pushed as far as, but not beyond, the contact point



The crown is then lined with glass ionomer cement and seated onto the tooth

using finger pressure or by asking the child to bite on a cotton roll (Fig 12)



Remove excess glass ionomer cement and floss between contact points (Fig 13)





Fig 11 Fig 12 Fig 13





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Stainless Steel Crowns

The technique for placing a stainless steel crown is a simple one and certainly in the hands of many clinicians can be performed far quicker than a multi-surface restoration.



Indications for Placement of Stainless Steel Crowns:

 Restoration of primary molars needing large multisurface restorations

 Restoration of primary molars in children with rampant caries

 Restoration of teeth after pulp therapy

 Restoration of teeth with developmental defects, e.g. amelogenesis

imperfecta

 Abutment for space maintainers

 Restoration of fractured primary molars

 Protection of molars in children with bruxism

 Restoration of hypomineralised young permanent molars



Contraindications for Placement of Stainless Steel Crowns:

The only contra-indication to the use of crowns is the inability to fit one. This may be due to insufficient co-operation, but it is more likely to be because there is an inadequate amount of crown tissue left to retain the restoration.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Stages of Placing a Conventional Stainless Steel Crown



Reduction of Occlusal Crown Height (Fig 12): using either a diamond stone or a

tapered bur and following the occlusal anatomy, the crown is reduced to the point where

the tooth is completely out of occlusion and there is room to fit a crown.



Reduction of Mesial and Distal Proximal Surfaces (Fig 13): using the tapered

tungsten carbide bur or tapered diamond stone, the mesial and distal surfaces are

reduced to ensure sufficient clearance for the crown. No gingival step should be left

otherwise the crown will not seat properly; this should be checked using a probe.



Selection of Crown and Trial Fit (Fig 14): with experience an estimate can be made of

the probable size of crown that will most likely fit. The crown is then gently placed onto

the tooth and pressed into place. It should snap onto the tooth with only a reasonable

amount of pressure.



Crimping the Crown margins (Fig 15): using the crimping pliers or Adams Pliers the

edge of the crown is carefully adapted to give a tight fit to the tooth. This is important to

prevent the build-up of plaque on the crown and hence lessen the prevalence of gingivitis.

If properly adapted and crimped, there should be a resistance to seating of the crown

followed by a snap as the crown fits into place.



Cementing the Crown (Fig 16): the crown should be filled with suitable cement

(polycarboxylate or glass ionomer). Pressure should be applied until the cement has set

and then any can be removed with an instrument such as an excavator. The contacts

should be flossed, the occlusion checked and finally the crown should be polished with a

prophylaxis paste.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





Fig 12 Fig 13





Fig 14 Fig 15





Fig 16





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Permanent Teeth



Regarding young permanent teeth, the acceptable procedures for the pulp endangered by carious lesions or trauma are as follows:

 Cavity liners and/or protective bases

 Indirect pulp treatment

 Direct pulp treatment

 Cvec pulpotomy

 Pulpotomy if for a defined period of time, e.g. MIH molars awaiting orthodontic

plannning

 Pulpectomy

 Root canal filling



Cavity Preparation

The emphasis of preparing a cavity should be towards minimal preparation. As such, where caries is not extensive, then only the affected fissure should be removed with the governing factor being the size of the smallest amalgam plugger.



Quadrant Dentistry

It should be the aim of every 4/5th year student to practice quadrant dentistry. This enhances behavioural management by reducing treatment time and the need for repeated local anaesthetics.



Indirect Pulp Capping (IPC)

In IPC, the non-remineralisable infected carious tissue is removed and a layer of affected but remineralisable carious tissue is left at the deepest sites of the cavity preparation to prevent pulp exposure. The infected carious tissue is the superficial layer of the carious cavity that needs to be removed to allow the healing of dental pulp. It contains the majority of the microorganisms and their toxic products that presents a source of continuous insult to the pulp. Whilst the affected dentine is the deep layer that contains only few microorganisms. The affected layer can be left in





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




place without any adverse effect on the dental pulp (Al-Zayer et al., 2003). The most important aspect is the sealing of the cavity. This is best achieved by insuring appropriate removal of carious tissue from the EDJ.



Indications for an IPC:

 Tooth with large carious lesion (early and advanced dentinal lesions).

 Tooth free from radicular pulpitis diagnosed by no history of spontaneous pain

 Absence of an abscess or a fistula

 No signs of carious pulp exposure



Stages of Indirect Pulp Capping



Administer local anaesthetic and apply rubber dam wherever possible



Access the cavity with high speed hand piece if the carious tooth is not cavitated



Remove the obvious soft and yellow carious tissue from the cavity using slow speed hand

piece or hand excavator leaving firmer and darker dentine that looks intact behind



Remove all carious tissues from the lateral walls of the cavity completely in order to

improve the sealing of the restorative material to the tooth, thus, preventing microleakage



Apply a liner (setting calcium hydroxide or light cure resin modified glass ionomer:

Vitrebond) over the carious tissue left behind to stimulate pulp repair and then a base of

glass ionomer



Restore the tooth with a resin composite or SSC if the tooth presented with proximal

caries





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Recommended Reading

 Al-Zayer M, Strafforn CH, Welch KB. Indirect pulp treatment of primary

posterior teeth: a retrospective study. Pediatric Dentistry 2003; 25: 29 – 36.

 Child Dental Health Survey 2013, England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

Health and Social Care Information Centre, London, UK. 2015.

 Innes N, Stirrups DR, Evans DJP, Hall N, Leggate M. A novel technique

using preformed metal crowns for managing carious primary molars in general practice. A retrospective analysis. British Dental Journal 2006; 200: 451-454.

 Rodd HD, Waterhouse PJ, Fuks AB, Fayle SA. Moffat MA. Pulp therapy

for primary molars. International Journal of Paediatric Dentistry 2006;16:15-23.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Interceptive Orthodontics



Introduction

The primary aim of an orthodontic assessment in a growing child is to differentiate between a developing normal occlusion and a potential malocclusion. A brief orthodontic assessment should always be a routine part of any paediatric dental examination. It is essential the clinician has a sound understanding of facial and dentoalveolar growth and the normal sequence and average age of eruption of the permanent teeth. Potential orthodontic problems should be identified early and referred to a specialist colleague at an appropriate time.



Preventive Orthodontics

Preventive orthodontic treatment is intended to prevent the development of a malocclusion by maintaining a normally developing dentition. This includes dental caries prevention, dental restorative care, space maintainers to replace prematurely lost primary teeth or traumatically avulsed permanent teeth and the removal of primary teeth that fail to shed normally to allow the permanent successors to erupt satisfactorily. In addition to this the dental practitioner should be aware of habits e.g. digit sucking which could lead to a malocclusion and should gently discourage this practice in the first instance.



Dental Caries

Some authors have suggested dental caries in the primary dentition may be associated with crowding in the permanent dentition (Karaiskos et al. 2005). Untreated carious primary teeth create a risk factor for the development of malocclusion by shortening of the dental arch by the breakdown of interproximal surfaces and mesial migration of teeth, or through the complete loss of primary teeth as a result of enforced extraction.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Dentists and other dental care professionals should strongly reinforce preventive messages to patients. Every effort should be made to treat primary dental caries, particularly with a view to retaining second primary molars if possible.



Space Maintenance

Space maintenance may be indicated following dental extractions to prevent drifting of teeth into an extraction space e.g. following loss of a second primary molar in a non-crowded dentition to prevent the need for later orthodontic treatment, or in a severely crowded dentition where further loss of space would have a substantial impact on future orthodontic treatment. Space maintainers are rarely used in these cases in the UK due to the need for scrupulous oral hygiene and optimum caries control in patients who have usually lost primary molar teeth as a result of dental caries and poor compliance with prevention.

Space maintainers should be routinely used, however, following loss of an upper permanent central incisor due to trauma to prevent mesial migration of the adjacent central and lateral incisors into the space. An appropriate prevention regime should be instituted and the patient should return for review.



Interceptive Orthodontics

Interceptive orthodontics can be thought of as an extension to preventive orthodontics and includes the elimination of local factors which may lead to the development of a malocclusion.



Indications for interceptive orthodontic treatment are primarily due to crowding, displacements of the mandible in closing from the rest position (anterior and posterior cross-bites) and local factors e.g. impacted upper first permanent molar teeth, retained primary teeth displacing erupting permanent teeth and delayed eruption of permanent teeth e.g. as a result of supernumery teeth. The use of a functional appliance in a growing child with a skeletal II relationship may also fall under the umbrella of interceptive orthodontics as this treatment may eliminate or reduce the complexity of subsequent treatment.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Enforced Extraction of Primary Teeth

The main complication of enforced extraction of poor quality primary teeth is usually mesial movement of teeth distal to the extraction space, causing crowding of permanent successors (E’s move mesially, D’s move distally). Mesial drift is greatest in crowded arches. Space loss is most severe when second primary molars are extracted, thus maintenance of these teeth is extremely important.

 A balancing extraction is the extraction of a contralateral tooth in the same

arch. Extractions of primary canines are usually always balanced.

 A compensating extraction is the removal of the same tooth in the

opposing arch. In general, there is no need to compensate primary tooth extractions.



Extraction of Primary Teeth due to incisor crowding

There is a significant increase in the size of the arches during the mixed dentition stage. If possible, decisions about treatment of anterior crowding should be deferred until the permanent lateral incisors have been erupted for at least a year, usually at about 8½-9 years of age. If crowding is mild treatment decisions should be delayed until the permanent canines and premolars are erupting.



Serial Extractions

Kjellgren (1948) suggested a planned sequence of extractions to allow crowded incisor segments to align spontaneously during the mixed dentition by shifting labial segment crowding to the buccal segments where it could be dealt with by premolar extractions. This is seldom used in clinical practice as it involves the removal of primary canines, first primary molars and finally first premolars in sequential episodes of treatment and may exhaust patient compliance.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Cross-Bites



Localised Anterior Cross-bite

Early correction of an anterior cross-bite encourages the development of a class I occlusion provided there is a normal skeletal pattern, adequate space in the arch and an adequate overbite to self-retain the proclined tooth after correction. It also avoids damage to the labial surface of the tooth in cross-bite.



The essential features of a removable appliance for correction of an anterior cross-bite are:

 Active component e.g. Z-spring, palatal screw, T-spring.

 Retention as far anteriorly as possible to resist the tendency of the spring to

displace the front of the appliance.

 Posterior capping to open the occlusion while the upper incisor moves labially.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





URA with Adams Cribs UR6

and UL6, anterior retention

UR1, posterior capping and a

cantilever z-spring to procline

UL1.





URA showing clasp UR1 to

improve anterior retention





Correction of anterior X-bite.

Note the wear facet on the

labial surface of the UL1



Correction of an anterior cross-bite will take approximately three months. Once the cross-bite is corrected the posterior capping should be removed from the appliance and the patient directed to continue to wear the appliance for 6 weeks full-time following which the appliance wear can be discontinued.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Posterior Cross-bites with Displacement

A posterior cross-bite is an abnormal buccolingual relationship of a tooth or teeth when the two dental arches are brought into centric relation. A unilateral cross-bite with a mandibular displacement on closure (initial contact cusp to cusp, achieving full intercuspation when the mandible displaces laterally) can be corrected during the mixed dentition by expansion of the upper arch. Correction with an upper removable appliance is dental rather than skeletal, as the major component of tooth movement is tipping.





Unilateral right posterior X-bite

with displacement





URA with retention from cribs

upper first premolars and first

permanent molars.

Active component is the

midline expansion screw.

Posterior capping is trimmed

following correction of X-bite

and appliance worn for a

period of retention. This

picture shows the capping

removed on one side prior to

removal on the other side.



Following correction of the posterior cross-bite the posterior capping is removed and the patient advised to wear the appliance as a retainer for a period of six months full-time and six months night-time wear.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Ectopic Eruption of First Permanent Molars

This can be an indication of inadequate arch length and occurs in 2-6% of children. Spontaneous disimpaction can occur but this is rare after 8 years of age. Impacted permanent molars may resorb the distal margins of second primary molars. This can be seen radiographically as a resorption cavity on the distal surface of the second primary molar and is quite distinct in appearance.



Disking of the primary molar may allow uprighting of the first permanent molar, although where the resorption of the primary molar is advanced or caries of the first permanent molar occurs, extraction of the second primary molar may be indicated. Mixed success has been reported with attempts to upright the permanent molar with orthodontic separators or brass ligature wire placed between the distal aspect of the second primary molar and the first permanent molar. On occasions, removable orthodontic appliances which engage a bracket on the buccal surface of the impacted first permanent molars have been used to disimpact molar teeth.



Advice from an orthodontic colleague should be sought.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





OPG and bitewings show

mesially impacted UR6 and

UL6

Distal resorption cavity on left

bite-wing radiograph





First Permanent Molars of Poor Prognosis



 First permanent molars are rarely the teeth of choice for extraction for

orthodontic reasons, but the planned removal of poor quality, hypomineralised or carious first permanent molar teeth can be a useful treatment option

 An dental panoramic radiograph must be taken to confirm the presence of all

permanent teeth

 The ideal time for removal of lower first permanent molars of poor prognosis

in a Class I molar relationship is when the bifurcation of the roots of the lower second molars are starting to calcify, usually at about 9 years of age

 Commonly the removal of a lower first permanent molar requires a

compensating extraction of the upper first permanent molar to prevent its overeruption

 Timing of the extraction of a first permanent molar in the upper arch is not as

critical as there is a greater tendency for mesial drift in the maxilla





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Extraction of an upper molar does not necessitate a compensating extraction

in the lower arch, because in a class I relationship the upper second primary molar partially occludes with the lower first molar





Non-palpable Upper Permanent Canine



As a result of their high propensity for ectopic eruption, it is essential to palpate for unerupted canines when examining any patient age 9 years and older, as early detection of an abnormal eruption path gives the opportunity for interceptive treatment, if appropriate.





If the canine is not palpable at 10 years of age, or a definite hollow felt by the clinician, an abnormal path of eruption should be suspected. Radiographic examination is indicated. The location of the canine can be determined using the principles of parallax e.g. dental panoramic radiograph and standard upper occlusal radiograph (vertical tube shift) or 2 periapical radiographs with a horizontal tube shift.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




The incidence of impacted canines in the maxilla is 2% of which 85% lie in a palatal position. About 12% of cases with impacted canines undergo some resorption of the lateral incisor root.



Interceptive extraction of the primary canines can improve the position of the permanent canine. The primary canine extraction must be balanced. Extraction of primary canines between the ages of 10 and 13 years leads to spontaneous alignment in 91% of cases if malposition of the permanent canine is minor and in 64 % of cases if the displacement of the permanent canine is more severe.



Functional Appliances

The incidence of trauma to the upper incisors is greater when the overjet is increased. Reducing the risk of trauma is one aim of early reduction of an increased overjet. This may be done with a functional appliance in the mixed dentition. A functional appliance is used in a growing child, preferably during or before the peak pubertal growth spurt. Functional appliances help to posture the mandible forward and reposition the condyle out of the glenoid fossa.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Recommended Reading

 Richardson A. (2000) interceptive orthodontics. Publisher: british dental

journal. 4th edition.

 Managing the developing occlusion. A guide for dental practitioners. BOS

2010

Http://www.bos.org.uk/portals/0/public/docs/making%20a%20referral/managin g-the-developing-occulusion-updated-apr10.pdf

 Husain J, Burden D, Mcsherry P (2016) Management of the palatally ectopic

maxillary canine, RCS Eng.

 Cobourne M, Williams A and Harrison M (2014) A guideline for first

permanent molar extraction in children , RCS Eng.

 Yaqoob et al (2016) Management of unerupted maxillary incisors, RCS Eng.

 Rock A (2002) Extraction of primary teeth - balance and compensation.

International Journal of Paediatric Dentistry 12; 151-153.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Dental Trauma



Introduction

Children suffering facial and dentoalveolar trauma presenting to the department are managed in the following way.



Where telephone contact is made by the referring dentist or by a parent directly, appropriate advice will be given over the phone. This is especially important for avulsed permanent teeth where every minute significantly affects the prognosis of healing of the tooth. This advice is frequently given by a member of staff and where there is significant trauma the parent is told to bring the child to clinic asap.



Acute trauma is one of the few criteria to be be seen as an emergency on the clinic and this is frequently by a postgraduate assigned to Casuals. On arrival a quick assessment is made of the child’s status. In some situations (e.g. loss of consciousness) medical consideration will overtake dental and facial trauma and the child will be referred to Accident and Emergency immediately. Where this is not the situation the extent of the emergency will be assessed, and appropriate treatment will be provided.



The department has a trauma history sheet that is filled in for all trauma patients. This form prompts the dentist to ask specific important questions and record clinical details. These questions include recording the accident details, any loss of consciousness, current medical history and in the cases of tooth fracture, where the fragments are. Following this thorough extra oral and intra oral examination is made. This includes recording all visible injuries.



Special tests where appropriate are carried out to finalise a diagnosis and to act as a baseline for future appointments. These include standardised radiographs (frequently two different x-ray views will be taken of an injured tooth or teeth), photographs and vitality tests.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Following a diagnosis in collaboration with a consultant or senior member of staff appropriate emergency treatment will be provided where required. This may be provided under local anaesthetic, sedation or general anaesthesia.



Follow up care is provided by postgraduate students under the supervision of a consultant on the Trauma Clinic. Trauma clinic runs 2 sessions a week under the care of Dr Day, Dr Nazzal, Dr Kindelan or Dr Kenny.



The importance of good and thorough clinical records cannot be overstated. Children frequently are followed up over several years with multiple appointments, in addition medico legal and police reports are frequently requested.



Background

When trauma occurs not only are the teeth involved, but also the child's entire self-image. Many problems may occur, even when the injury seems minor in nature, because of the varied response of the human dental pulp. Positive predictions on the future status of the injured tooth may be given with guarded optimism. No matter how sophisticated our diagnostic tools are the extent of injury to the pulp and surrounding tissues, blood vessels and nerves cannot always be accurately determined.



Sequence of events

1. Initial contact: speak to parent, get history of accident, try to alleviate anxiety.

2. Examine patient: quick clinical examination, ascertain extent of damage

(?CNS involvement, etc.). Consider need to refer quickly for full medical appraisal; especially if there is a head injury.

3. Take radiographs at two different angles. Ideally record the injuries with

photographs.

4. Check with parent to verify need for tetanus cover.

5. Consider the possibility of non-accidental injury (NAI)

6. Soft tissue examination and clean up.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




7. Evaluation of extent of dental injury fracture, displacement, etc.

8. Immediate treatment, particularly considering pain control, protection of the

pulp, repositioning and splinting of teeth.

9. Advice to child and parent regarding pain, swelling, discolouration.

10. Recall examination

11. Produce accurate records.



The importance of good record keeping cannot be overstressed. There can be legal implications arising from accidents and the dentist could be asked to submit a report to an insurance company or a courtroom. Such reports should be comprehensive and outline the signs and symptoms presented at first appointment, treatment instituted and an estimation of treatment required to effect permanent restoration of the dentition.



Gum Shields

For patients under the care of the dental hospital or being seen due to dental trauma, a laboratory gum shield is provided where appropriate. A good alginate impression is required of the upper arch with full extention into the anterior sulcii and extending back to at least the first permanent molars. The child is offered a choice of different colour blanks to choose from. The chosen one will be used to make the gum shield and should be sent with the impression. Where the child is not due for another appointment for several months, the gum shield will be sent out to the parent’s home address if this is requested on the laboratory sheet.



Background: Oro-facial Protection in Sports

Compared with some types of injuries, trauma to the teeth is generally not serious; yet teeth have the lowest potential to return to a normal healthy state following injury than any other part of the body. Prevention must be the prime emphasis of sports medicine in relation to dental injuries.

The intra-oral mouth guard is an effective device, not only for prevention of sports injuries to the teeth and other oral structures, but also for providing protection against





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




concussion. It is recommended for the following sports: soccer, rugby football, squash, handball, volleyball, racquetball, water polo, wrestling, boxing, horse riding, skiing, ski-racing, figure skating, body building, hockey, judo, karate, weight lifting, skateboarding, sky diving, surfing, moto cross, discus throwing, basketball, gymnastics, parachuting.



Intra-oral mouth protectors may be divided into three types, stock-type, mouth formed and custom made. The custom made is considered to be the most acceptable model.





All mouthguards should be examined periodically for possible defects, and where necessary, replaced. If the athlete has a mixed dentition, space to accommodate the eruption of permanent teeth can be allowed by waxing over these teeth to serve as a spacer. In the early mixed dentition stage and during orthodontic treatment the position of the anterior teeth changes rapidly which can result in the gum shield not fitting after six months or so. There are now special gum shields which are used for children undergoing orthodontics which can be adjusted or made to adapt to the orthodontic appliances.



For a successful mouthguard programme, coach, trainer, parent and player cooperation and support are necessary. Accident prone individuals should have special consideration. For example, individuals with maxillary protrusion are five times more liable to dental injuries than other with a normal overjet. Early orthodontic treatment and extra-oral protection should be considered in these cases.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Non-Accidental Injury

This is a very difficult area and any suspicions should be discussed with a senior member of staff or consultant before discussing your suspicions with the parent and or child. Part of the postgraduate and undergraduate course is dedicated to this area to increase awareness of what is expected of dentists. Our major role is to identify where we are suspicious and refer the child for a second and specialist opinion. For the Leeds Dental Institute this is to the on call specialist registrar in paediatric medicine. If appropriate, concerns may need to be discussed with the Safeguarding Team.



Children can present to the department either where they may have suffered dental trauma or as part of an unrelated appointment e.g. routine check-up. Occasionally dentists will refer children in to see a Paediatric Dental Consultant for a second opinion where they have suspicions.



A thorough history is required of both how the accident happened, your clinical finding and what was said by the different parties involved. The recommend text on

the website (www.cpdt.org.uk/index.htm) is excellent and should be read. As it summarises suspicions of non-accidental injuries may arise when:

 Has there been delay in seeking dental advice, for which there is no

satisfactory explanation?

 Does the history change over time or not explain the injury or illness?

 When you examine the child, are there any injuries that cannot be explained?

(E.g. fractured teeth, discoloured teeth, bruising, healing bone fractures).

 Are you concerned about the child’s behaviour and interaction with the

parent/carer?



If the answer to any of these questions is YES you should discuss with a senior colleague and follow local child protection procedures. If all the answers are NO then diagnose and treat as normal.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




What to do with an Avulsed Tooth

These steps are expected to be followed by the doctor or triage nurse in case of avulsion of a permanent tooth (patient is at least 6 years old; otherwise it may well be a primary tooth – avulsed primary teeth should not be replanted).



Primary action: tooth should be replaced as soon as possible after avulsion





There are several situations where a tooth should not be replanted without first contacting a dentist. These are related to specific medical conditions:



 Congenital cardiac (heart) disease requiring antibiotic cover prior to dental

treatment or

 Where the child is immunocompromised (on chemotherapy or had a

transplant – heart, kidney, lung, etc) or seeing a specialist (immunologist) to treat an inherent immune defect.



In cases where the doctor or triage nurse is informed by telephone of avulsion:

Instruct the parent/guardian to:

1. Find the tooth immediately





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




2. Gently rinse under running tap water or milk to remove large dirt particles

3. Avoid scraping the root, and try to hold the tooth by the crown (the other end

from the pointy bit)

4. Replace the tooth as soon as possible with the pointy surface going first into

the socket and the crown end facing out into the mouth. (Place as far into the socket as possible until level with the other teeth, child will normally stop you as it will be sore before it is fully seated.)

5. Keep the tooth in place by asking the child to bite on a piece of cloth

6. Seek immediate dental consultation and treatment (Emergency Dental

Service) or go to the Accident or Emergency as soon as possible



In cases where the parent/guardian is not capable of replacing the tooth at site of injury:

Instruct the parent/guardian to avoid scraping the root, to not use disinfectants, to put the tooth in a moist environment (preferably in cold fresh milk) and arrive as soon as possible at the dentist for consultation and treatment (Emergency Dental Service) or go to the Accident and Emergency as soon as possible



When the patient arrives with an avulsed tooth to the hospital emergency room, the doctor or triage nurse should:

 Ensure that the tooth is kept in a moist medium (sterile saline or cold milk)

 Check the patient’s medical history

 Gently rinse under running tap water to remove large dirt particles

 Replace the tooth as soon as possible, (Place as far into the socket as

possible until level with the other teeth, child will normally stop you as it will be sore before it is fully seated.)

 Ask the child to bite on a piece of gauze

 Seek immediate dental consultation and treatment (Emergency Dental

Service) or Maxillofacial service if polytrauma or associated facial injuries.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Recommended Reading

 Andreasen J.O And Andreasen F.M (2007) Textbook and color atlas of

traumatic injuries to the teeth rd . 4 edition. Copenhagen: Munksgaard.

 Dental Trauma Guide - www.dentaltraumaguide.org

 Andersson L, Andreasen JO, Day PF, et al. International Association of

Dental Traumatology guidelines for the management of traumatic dental injuries: 2. Avulsion of permanent teeth. Dent Traumatol 2012; 28:88-96

 DiAngelis AJ, Andreasen JO, Ebelseseder KA, et al. International Association

of Dental Traumatology guidelines for the management of traumatic dental injuries: 1. Fractures and luxations of permanent teeth. Dent Traumatol 2012; 28:2-12

 Malmgren B, Andreasen JO, Flores MT, et al. International Association of

Dental Traumatology guidelines for the management of traumatic dental injuries: 3. Injuries in the primary dentition. Dent Traumatol 2012; 28: 174-82

 Day PF, Gregg TA. Treatment of avulsed permanent teeth in children. UK

National Clinical Guidelines in Paediatric Dentistry. 2012. Available online at

http://www.bspd.co.uk/Default.aspx?tabid=62

 Albadri, S., Zaitoun, H. and Kinirons, M., 2010. UK National Clinical

Guidelines in Paediatric Dentistry. Treatment of traumatically intruded permanent incisor teeth in children. International journal of paediatric dentistry.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Children with Special Needs

Introduction

Special Needs within the context of paediatric dentistry can be defined as a co-existing condition which, for children:

 Puts their general health at risk if he/she suffers dental disease or requires

dental treatment

 Makes access to dental care difficult

 Makes dental treatment more difficult to provide or makes dental disease

more likely to occur



(Modified from the Holzel Report 1978)



This section will focus on the common medical conditions that may present in children.



Medically Compromised Children

There are many medical conditions that can affect the provision of dental care. In order to treat medically compromised patients safely the following are imperative:

 To be able to obtain an accurate and thorough medical history

 To be able to understand the general implications of a medical illness on the

provision of dental treatment

 To be able to understand the impact the medical condition on treatment

planning



Increasingly more and more children are now surviving with complex medical problems in whom dental disease can have grave consequences. This signifies the need for rigorous preventive regimens and maintenance of a healthy oral environment.



Medical History

All patients should have an accurate medical history taken before any dental treatment. This is important for several reasons:





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 To identify the presence of a medical condition(s) which may have

implications on the provision of dental care.

 To ascertain whether a child is receiving any medication (or has done in the

past) that could result in adverse interaction(s) with drugs or treatment administered for management of dental disease

 To facilitate communication with medical colleagues

 To satisfy medico-legal requirements

 To plan the most effective treatment and prevention ad different stages of

dental development



Cardiovascular Disorders

These can be divided into two main groups: congenital heart disease (existing at birth); and those disorders that are acquired after birth e.g. rheumatic fever.



Congenital heart disease (CHD) has an incidence of approximately 8-10 cases per 1000 live births. CHD can be classified into acyanotic or cyanotic lesions depending on clinical presentation.



The acyanotic group of conditions is characterised by connection between the systemic and pulmonary circulations or a stenosis (narrowing) of either circulation. The most common anomalies are:

 Atrial Septal Defect

 Ventricular Septal Defect

 Patent Ductus Arteriosus

 Coarctation of the aorta

 Aortic stenosis

 Pulmonary stenosis





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




All cyanotic conditions exhibit right-to-left shunting of desaturated blood. The most common cyanotic lesions are:

 Tetralogy of Fallot

 Transposition of great vessels



Dental Management:

Prevention of dental disease is the most important consideration in planning dental care for children with cardiovascular disorders.



Prior to NICE guidance published in 2008 all patients with CHD or previous rheumatic fever required antibiotic prophylaxis prior to invasive dental procedures to reduce the risk of infective endocarditis (IE). However, NICE recommended in 2008 that antibiotics to prevent IE should not be given to adults and children with structural cardiac defects at risk of IE who are undergoing dental interventional procedures. It is important to understand that the change in guidance does not mean that children with cardiovascular disorders are not at risk from IE, only that antibiotic prophylaxis has not been shown to be effective at reducing the risk of IE.



Key points:

 Pulpotomy or pulpectomy is contraindicated in children with cardiovascular

disorders due to the possibility of subsequent bacteraemia putting the child at risk of IE.

 There is no contraindication to the use of vasoconstrictors in local anaesthetic

solutions in children with cardiovascular disorders.

 Electrosurgery, electronic pulp testers and ultrasonic cleaning devices should

be avoided in children with cardiac pacemakers.

 Ensure child is not at risk of prolonged bleeding due to thrombocytopenia

(platelet count <150x109/L) and/or anticoagulant medication. If this is the case it is essential to check the platelet count and prothrombin time (INR) if dental extractions are required.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Bleeding Disorders



Inherited Coagulation Disorders

The most common disorders are haemophilia A and von Willebrand’s disease, both caused by a decrease in factor VIII. Other disorders of coagulation include vitamin K deficiency and disorders of the liver.

Haemophilia A:

This is an X-linked recessive disorder, which can vary in its degree of severity affecting approximately 1:10000 live male births. The disease is classified as severe, moderate or mild depending on the levels of circulating factor VIII. Severe haemophilia A sufferers have <1% factor VIII and can bleed spontaneously into joints (haemarthroses) and muscles, which may lead to severe physical handicaps. Children with moderate haemophilia A have 1-5% factor VIII resulting in moderate to severe bleeding following minor trauma while those with 5-25% factor VIII are mildly affected and may not present until much later in life following significant trauma or surgery.



Haemophilia B or Christmas disease:

Also inherited as an X-linked recessive disorder and results in prolongation of APTT due to factor IX deficiency



Von Willebrand’s disease:

This is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with varying degrees of severity and is the most common inherited bleeding disorder affecting approximately 1:1000. It is characterised by a vascular abnormality, defective platelets that do not adhere to each other, and decreased levels of factor VIII. The most common clinical manifestations include nose bleeds and spontaneous gingival bleeding.



Platelet Disorders

Platelet disorders can classified as either a deficiency or dysfunction of platelets. The most common oral manifestations are petechiae and ecchymoses and possibly spontaneous gingival bleeding or prolonged bleeding following minor trauma or tooth brushing.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Thrombocytopenia:

This is defined as a platelet count <150x109 9 /L (normal range is 150-400x10/L) i.e. a reduction in the number of circulating platelets. The platelet count should be at least 80x109/L before dental extractions are attempted. In children, the cause of thrombocytopenia may be idiopathic (unknown cause) known as idiopathic thrombocytopenia (ITP), be a result following administration of various drugs which may cause marrow suppression or from other haematological diseases such as leukaemia or aplastic anaemia.



Platelet function disorders:

These may be congenital or acquired and will result in failure of initial clot formation, as is the case with thrombocytopenia. A child with a platelet disorder will therefore bleed immediately after trauma or surgery, unlike those with haemophilia, who will start to bleed approximately 4 hours after the incident due to a malfunction in the coagulation cascade rather than the initial clotting process.



Dental Management:

A good history enquiring if there is any family history of bleeding disorders of if the child bruises or bleeds more easily than expected should form part of the standard medical history taking procedure. If a child has a diagnosed bleeding disorder, careful liaison with the child’s paediatrician or haematologist is important to establish not only the diagnosis and severity of the bleeding disorder but also in coordinating and managing the child’s dental treatment to ensure delivery of care is safe.



Key points:

 Avoid mandibular block injections as haematoma formation in the

pterygomandibular region may lead to airway obstruction.

 Avoid dental extractions where possible so pulp treatment of restorable

carious primary teeth may be required to avoid extractions.

 If extractions cannot be avoided they are usually best managed in the hospital

setting in conjunction with the haematology team.

 Local measures such as socket dressings (e.g. surgicel) and suturing should

be employed to control bleeding when teeth have been extracted. Tranexamic acid may also be considered.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Red Blood Cell Disorders: Anaemia

The causes of anaemia in children may be due to blood loss, deficiencies in iron, folate and/or vitamin B12, bone marrow failure, or inherited haemaglobinopathies such as sickle cell disease or thalassaemia. Anaemia is generally considered to be present if the haemaglobin level falls below 10.0g/dL and all anaemic children have a greater tendency to bleed after invasive treatment.



Key points:

 Elective dental general anaesthesia should be avoided if a child's

haemoglobin is <10.0g/dL and the child referred to their General Medical Practitioner in the first instance for treatment to raise the Hb level if it is assumed to be due to iron deficiency. In children, iron deficiency is most commonly due to dietary deficiency or malabsorption as opposed to blood loss.

 In children with sickle cell anaemia, minimise stress that may compromise the

child’s ability to oxygenate the tissues adequately.

 If a child with sickle cell anaemia requires a dental general anaesthetic,

careful liaison with the anesthetist is necessary.



White Blood Cell Disorders: Leukaemia

Leukemia is a type of cancer of the blood or bone marrow characterized by an abnormal increase of immature white blood cells, known as lymphoblasts. It is the most common form of childhood cancer with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) accounting for 75% of cases. Oral mucosal bleeding may be a presenting factor of leukaemia along with lethargy, pallor, fever and anorexia.



Dental Management:

Prevention of dental disease is a high priority for children with leukaemia as it is with other medical conditions. If a child with leukaemia does require dental treatment during chemotherapy, careful liaison with the child’s haematologist/oncologist is necessary in order to plan the timing of the dental treatment. It may be necessary for a child to have a platelet infusion and/or antimicrobial prophylaxis prior to invasive





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




dental treatment depending on the child’s blood counts. Ideally no treatment should be carried out until the child is in remission or on maintenance therapy



Key points:

 Chemotherapy has several oral side effects, including mucositis, oral

ulceration, infection and bleeding. A careful oral preventive care plan is therefore necessary for all children undergoing chemotherapy in order to maintain meticulous oral hygiene, reduce the risk of oral infection and/or mucositis symptoms.

 Pulpal therapy of primary teeth during chemotherapy is contraindicated.





Diabetes Mellitus

Type 1 or insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) is the most common endocrine disorder of childhood and affects approximately 2 per 1000 children between 5 and 18 years of age. The aim of diabetes treatment is to maintain blood glucose at a normal level and thereby prevent hypo and hyperglycaemia. This generally involves the administration of insulin and dietary management. Hypoglycaemia indicates too much insulin relative to food intake and energy expenditure and if recognised before a child loses consciousness can be treated by giving a carbohydrate containing snack.



Type II diabetes mellitus is a condition of insulin resistance, where the utilisation of endogenously produced insulin at target cells is altered. The condition most often presents in middle and older age, although it is now more frequently diagnosed in overweight children and young adults.



Dental Manifestations:

An increase in salivary glucose levels and lower salivary pH has also been detected in diabetics, resulting in more viscous saliva and the symptom of a dry mouth. Individuals with diabetes are also more likely to develop periodontal disease, it is thought that this is due to impaired glycaemic control, and altered immune system.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




As a consequence oral bacterial and fungal infections eg. Pseudomembranous Candidosis, are more common in individuals with diabetes mellitus. Wound healing can be delayed in patients with chronic hyperglycaemia. Dental Management:

Poorly controlled diabetic children are more at risk of periodontal disease as they exhibit increased gingival changes, one possible reason for which may be a result of an altered response to infection. They may also be more susceptible to infection, in particular candida.



Key points:

 Like with many other medical conditions preventive care is a priority for these

children to minimise the potential of infection.

 Dental appointments should be made when the child’s blood sugar level is

usually well controlled which is often in the morning after the child has had their insulin injection and breakfast.

 A parent/carer should be advised that their child should have their medication

and eat as normal before a routine dental appointment.

 Signs of hypoglycaemia such as sweating, trembling, apprehension and or

aggression should be recognised early before the child progresses to loss of consciousness. If a child with diabetes requires a general anaesthetic, careful liaison with their paediatrician is required.





Epilepsy

Epilepsy is currently defined as a tendency to have recurrent seizures (fits) and affects approximately 0.5-2% of the population. There are many different types of seizures which are broadly classified as generalised (tonic-clonic/grand mal or absence/petit mal) or focal (simple or complex).



Dental Management:

Optimal oral hygiene is required to minimise the risks of developing gingival enlargement for children who take phenytoin as their anti-epileptic medication.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Children with epilepsy, particularly those who are poorly controlled frequently sustain trauma to their anterior teeth during a seizure. Therefore children with large increased overjets should be considered for orthodontic treatment to minimise the risk of trauma to the anterior teeth. If an epileptic child requires a removable appliance, it should be well retained with clasps and re-inforced to minimise the risks of inhalation if an appliance was to break during a seizure.



Key points:

 Stressful situations such as a visit to the dentist may precipitate a seizure,

therefore treatment under inhalation sedation may need to be considered.

 It is important to ascertain the type of epilepsy, frequency of seizures and any

precipitating factors before commencing treatment.

 Gingival enlargement is a risk factor for children who are being treated with

phenytoin.

 Ensure any liquid medication is sugar free.





Cerebral Palsy

Cerebral palsy is caused by brain damage pre, peri or postnatally resulting in a disorder of posture and movement. It describes a group of non-progressive neuromuscular disorders and is classified according to the type of motor defect:

 Spastic (hemiplegia, paraplegia and quadriplegia)

 Dyskinetic or Athetoid

 Ataxic

 Mixed



Dental Management:

Children with cerebral palsy may present with poor oral hygiene and increased periodontal disease due to limited manual dexterity. An increased gag reflex may also make it more difficult for parents/carers to maintain an adequate standard of oral hygiene for the child. Prevention including oral hygiene instruction and support to parents/carers in caring for their child's dentition is therefore crucial. Other





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




common clinical presentations of children with cerebral palsy are drooling, mouth breathing, bruxism, tongue thrust habit and peri-oral sensitivity. Children with cerebral palsy, particularly those with accompanying intellectual impairment may self-mutilate by biting oral soft tissues. They may also have erosion due to gastro-oesophageal reflux and have build-up of calculus and poor oral hygiene, especially if they are PEG fed.



Many children with cerebral palsy do not have any cognitive impairment but may use communication aids such as Makaton and Pictorial Exchange Communication System (PECS) which are programs designed to provide a means of communication to individuals who cannot communicate efficiently by speaking.



Key Points:

 Treat the child in a more upright position if they have an exaggerated gag

reflex.

 Devise a rigorous preventive programme particularly if the child has had

surgery to reposition submandibular salivary gland ducts to a more posterior position to reduce drooling, as this will have left them at high risk of dental caries to the lower anterior teeth in particular.

 Give support and advice to parents and carers as to the optimal ways to care

for their child’s teeth.





Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD)

The word 'spectrum' is used because, while all people with autism share three main areas of difficulty, the condition can vary in severity. Some are able to live relatively 'normal' lives whereas others will require a lifetime of specialist support. The three main areas of difficulty which all people with autism share are sometimes known as the 'triad of impairments'. They are:

 Difficulty with social communication

 Difficulty with social interaction

 Difficulty with social imagination





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Dental Manifestations:

Children with autism are more likely to have feeding problems than non-autistic children (often linked to sensory needs) and eat a narrower range of foods. They may have a strong preference for foods of the same colour or texture. Clinicians should be aware of these preferences when giving diet advice tailored to the individual needs.



Dental Management:

The dental management of autistic children can be very challenging so it is important to understand the particular likes/dislikes of each individual child if you are to treat them successfully. However, it is often only possible to treat the higher-functioning children where communication is not severely compromised under local anaesthetic or inhalation sedation. Often a child with more severe autism will need their dental treatment carrying out under general anaesthetic so again prevention is a key aspect to managing children with ASD.



Key Points:

 Encourage parents to visit prior to the appointment for the child to meet staff

and see the dental surgery and environment.

 You can make a picture story (social story) of the dental appointment.

 Encourage parents to make a picture story (social story) of the dental

appointment and what will happen.

 Find out how autism specifically affects their child eg. Sensory areas, likes,

dislikes, dietary preferences, communication aids.

 See patients at the beginning of the day or after lunch when the waiting room

is quieter and no waiting time needed.

 Encourage patients to bring in to the surgery anything that will help them to

feel less anxious eg. toys, blankets, therapy dog

 Be aware that children with autism often have difficulty in expressing pain and

therefore it is important to listen to parents concerns regarding their ch ild’s pain if they report a change in behaviour such as disturbed sleep or unexplained emotional outbursts.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) ADHD is the most common childhood onset behaviour disorder affecting 1 in 200 children in the UK. It is also known as attention deficit disorder (ADD). Boys are more commonly affected than girls. Those affected have a greatly reduced ability to maintain attention without being distracted, to control what they're doing or saying (because of impulsivity) and to control the amount of physical activity appropriate to the situation i.e. they tend to be very fidgety. Children with more severe ADHD may be taking stimulant medication to control their behaviour. The most common stimulant drug used is methylphenidate (trade name Ritalin), which improve a child's ability to focus.



Dental Management:

A child with ADHD will have a limited attention span and therefore will have difficulty focusing on the dentist. If a child has severe ADHD, as with some children with ASD it may only be possible to complete dental treatment under general anaesthetic. Therefore, as with all other children with disabilities or a medical condition preventive advice and measures are paramount.



Key Points:

 The child should not be kept waiting and appointments need to be kept short.

 Ideally dental appointments should be arranged when the plasma level of any

ADHD medication is at its optimum.

 It is important to give a child with ADHD clear instructions, to maintain eye

contact and not to overload the child with information.

 Behavior management techniques such as tell-show-do, distraction and

positive reinforcement should be employed to reward good behaviour.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Obesity

The prevalence of obesity is currently rising in the UK, most worryingly amongst children. There is some correlation between high level of dental caries and a high body mass index. Both obesity and dental decay are associated with over consumption of high-sugar foods and drinks. Obese children are more likely to have caries in their permanent teeth. The correlation is less clear in the primary dentition.



Clinicians must offer patients well-rounded dietary advice and it is important that a healthy alternative is suggested for high sugar foods. For example, crisps are regarded as a non-cariogenic snack, however, they contain high levels of fat and are therefore not a healthy alternative snack. See the NHS Change 4 Life website/app for healthy sugar swaps. Clinicians should have a collaborative approach to patient care and work in close liaison with/refer to dieticians where appropriate.



Recommended Reading

 th Scully C and Cawson R.A. (2005) Medical Problems in Dentistry. 5 edition.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Sedation & General Anaesthesia



Introduction

The provision of adequate anxiety control is an integral part of the practice of dentistry. The General Dental Council has indicated that this is both a right for the patient and a duty placed on the dentist. All patients need and deserve to expect appropriate and individually considered pain and anxiety control for any dental procedure. When the more common behaviour management techniques are inappropriate or have failed to allow completion of treatment under local analgesia alone, other techniques, such as sedation or general anaesthesia may need to be considered.



For pharmacological relief of anxiety and induction of sedation in children for dentistry, two main routes of administration are available:

 Inhalation with nitrous oxide & oxygen

 Oral



Other less commonly used routes are:

 Nasal / trans-mucosal

 Rectal

 Intra-venous



Inhalation with Nitrous Oxide & Oxygen



Definition

The definition of conscious sedation in the UK is: “A technique in which the use of a drug or drugs produces a state of depression of the central nervous system enabling treatment to be carried out, but during which verbal contact with the patient is maintained throughout the period of sedation. The drugs and techniques used to provide conscious sedation for dental treatment should carry a margin of safety wide enough to render loss of consciousness unlikely.”





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Indications

Used for children and young people:

 Who require multiple quadrant restorations/extractions

 Who are anxious but potentially cooperative

 To supplement LA for hypersensitive pulps or sensitive teeth with molar

incisor hypomineralisation

 To reduce a gag reflex



Patient selection

 Dental anxiety - very good for anxious but generally compliant children

 Need cooperation from the child to wear the nasal hood

 Child should be a nose breather or be able to breathe through their nose

 Prolonged or traumatic dental procedure

 Medical conditions potentially aggravated by stress



Preparation

 Obtain valid consent

 Provide pre and post sedation patient instructions

 All members of the dental sedation team should have the relevant knowledge

and skills for the sedation technique and be able to manage any sedation-related complications or medical emergencies.

 A responsible adult escort, who is capable of looking after the patient unaided,

should be present and accompany the patient home after treatment under conscious sedation.



Procedure

The following is a mixture of procedure and effects/disadvantages.

 Use a titrated dose of nitrous oxide with oxygen

 Monitor patient by trained operator and assistant; monitor as a minimum, the

patient’s clinical signs and oxygen saturation using pulse oximetry





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Works best if combined with semi-hypnotic suggestion

 Time of onset of sedation; titrated to desired effect over approx 5 mins

 Duration of action; as long as the nitrous oxide is maintained

 Recovery time; approx 3 – 5 mins once nitrous-oxide turned off

 Level of nitrous-oxide should not exceed 50%

 Minimal impairment of any reflexes

 Some analgesia is produced

 N2O must be administered continuously via a mask close to the operation site

and can interfere with treatment on anterior maxillary teeth

 Level of sedation is dependent on psychological reassurance

 Generally predictable results

 Extent of postoperative amnesia variable

 Must keep nitrous oxide pollution at lower level of 100ppm over 8 hour TWA



Recovery and Discharge

 The patient is orientated in time, place and person

 Vital signs are stable and within normal limits for the patients. Respiratory

status is not compromised

 Pain and discomfort have been addressed and haemostasis achieved

 Responsible escort present

 Both written and verbal post-operative instructions given





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Oral Sedation



Indications

 For use when inhalation and intravenous sedation are not suitable eg.

patients with special care requirements or extreme needle-phobia

 Can be used in combination with other sedation techniques

 Ideal for very young children for short procedure e.g. Extraction of a

traumatised upper primary incisor.



Procedure

 Benzodiazepines usually midazolam 0.3 – 0.5mg/kg [maximum dose 20mg]

 Can have an unpredictable effect

 Inability to alter sedation level

 Sedative & amnesic

 Time to onset of sedation approx 40 mins

 Duration of effect approx 30 mins

 Recovery time approx 30 mins

 Can be given with paracetamol to address pain management





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Other Forms of Sedation

 Nasal / trans- mucosal:

- Usually use midazolam

- Not generally used in this department

 Rectal:

- Usually use diazepam

- Not generally used in this department

 Intravenous:

- Not recommended for patients under 16 years old

- Occasionally used on phobic adolescents [12 – 15 years old]

- Use a titrated dose of midazolam as the standard intravenous

sedation technique.

- Should not be given in Primary Care



General Anaesthesia

General anaesthesia (GA) is one of the methods used to reduce pain and anxiety associated with dental treatment. Since 2001, it has been restricted to a hospital setting where critical care facilities are available. Dental caries is the most common reason a child between five and nine years of age is admitted to hospital in both England and Scotland (30.9% of all GAs).



General anaesthetics have risks of morbidity and mortality therefore it should only be used when local anaesthetic and or conscious sedation have been attempted or is inappropriate. Dental treatment should only be performed under general anaesthesia when this is considered to be the most clinically appropriate method of management. Valid consent must be taken prior to a GA including risks of the general anaesthetic.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Indications

 Dental anxiety/phobia

 Child unable to cope with treatment under local anaesthetic and or conscious

sedation

 Complex, prolonged or surgical procedure

 Extractions in multiple quadrants

 Patients medical history

 Acute dental infection



Risks of a General Anaesthetic

 Common: feeling sick, vomiting, shivering, headache, sore throat, feeling

tired and confused

 Uncommon: breathing problems, unintentional damage to teeth, awareness.

 Very rare: drug reactions, brain damage, risk of death (1:100,000).



GA pre-op preparation and planning

 Ensure prevention advice has been given

 Consider which general anaesthetic list the patient should be placed on:

- Exodontia or comprehensive dental care

- One-day unit or Clarendon wing (medically compromised)

 Obtain valid consent. Treatment plan and consent form must be signed by a

specialist in paediatric dentistry. Give patient printed information booklet on general anaesthetics.

 Check and update patient’s medical history. Highlight any specific medical

concerns and liaise with other medical specialties where appropriate. Ask all patients (irrespective of racial background) if they, or anyone in their family, has sickle cell disease.

- If there is a family history of Sickle Cell Disease (ie Homozygous Sickle

Cell Anaemia), then results of any previous tests (eg heel prick) should





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




be checked, or electrophoresis should be carried out to determine the patients HbS status.

- Patients with no family history of Sickle Cell Disease do not need to be

tested prior to GA, irrespective of their racial background. Patients with a family history of trait only do not need to be tested. If the patient/guardian does not know if there is a family history of Sickle Cell Anaemia, then we should record their answer as such, but such children do not need to be tested as it is considered safe to assume that they are negative.

- Pre-GA admission planning for patients with known homozygous Sickle

Cell Anaemia will require careful liaison with the patient’s haematologist and the anaesthetist.

 Document child’s weight and height

 Check and update patient’s contact details including telephone number

 Ensure radiographs (where appropriate) are available and up to date

 Highlight any special considerations or specific treatment needs

 Send correspondence to GDP where appropriate

 Document follow up plan



Outpatient in One Day Unit

 Dental extractions (exodontia) or comprehensive dental care (extractions,

restorations)

 Children 3 years old & over, up to 16

 Body mass index less than 30

 No relevant medical history (ASA I & II)

 All carious teeth should be removed at time of GA to ensure patient wakes up

dentally fit (also to avoid / reduce the no. of repeat GA’s)

 Treatment plan must be signed by a specialist in paediatric dentistry





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Day Case/Inpatient on Clarendon Wing

 Comprehensive care (restorations, extractions, surgicals, ultrasonic scaling)

 Any age up to 16 years

 Any medical history

 All carious teeth should be treated (i.e. patient must wake up dentally fit)

 Intra-oral radiographs can be taken in theatre if unable to cope pre-op

 Treatment plan must be signed by a specialist in paediatric dentistry





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Anxiety Management & Sedation - Year 5



During Yr5 the AM&S module covers all aspects of treating the anxious patient, both children and adults. The module comprises a lecture course that runs in term 5.1, alongside clinical sessions in terms 5.1 & 5.2.



Clinical sessions will cover both inhalational sedation and intravenous sedation and you will be expected to actively participate in the treatment of the patients booked in.



Student groups will be small, typically 2 students per member of staff and a reflective logbook will be used in order to record all experience gained.



Recommended Reading

 Conscious Sedation In Dentistry (2017). Scottish Dental Clinical Effectiveness

Programme www.sdcep.org.uk

 The Association Of Paediatric Anaesthetists Of Great Britain & Ireland.

Guidelines for the management of children referred for dental extraction under

general anaesthesia (2011) www.bspd.co.uk

 Standards For Conscious Sedation In The Provision Of Dental Care (2015).

Report of the Intercollegiate Advisory Committee for Sedation in Dentistry. London (UK): The Dental Faculties of the Royal Colleges of Surgeons and the Royal College of Anaesthetists.

 Paterson S.A, Tahmassebi J.F (2003) Use of inhalation sedation in paediatric

dentistry. Dental Update 30; 350-358.

 Nice Clinical Guidelines On “Sedation In Children And Young People” (2010) -

www.nice.org.uk

 Dental Sedation Teachers Group - www.dstg.co.uk

 Wilson Ke (2013) Conscious Sedation: Overview of Paediatric Dental

Sedation: 1. Current UK Guidelines. Dental Update Vol 40 No 9 P728

 Wilson Ke (2013) Conscious Sedation: Overview of Paediatric Dental

Sedation: 2. Nitrous Oxide/Oxygen Inhalation Sedation. Dental Update Vol 40 No 10 P822





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Dental Anomalies in Children



Definition

Dental anomalies are associated with defects in tooth development and may be caused by hereditary, systemic, traumatic or local factors (e.g. Drug).

This section of the handbook will briefly describe the more common anomalies that you may come across.



Tooth Number

 Alteration in tooth number occurs usually during initiation of the dental lamina

stage of dental development

 The alteration may produce extra or missing teeth



Extra teeth:

Supernumerary teeth are common:

 0.2-0.8% primary dentition (Caucasian)  1.5-3.5% permanent dentition (Male to female ratio of about 2:1)

They may be described according to their form and their position:



 Form:

- Conical (peg shaped)

- Tuberculate (barrel shaped)

- Supplemental

- Odontome

 Position:

- Mesiodens (in the midline)

- Distomolar (distal to the arch)

- Paramolar (lingual or buccal to the arch)

- The most common position for a permanent supernumerary is

the premaxilla





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





Missing Teeth: Hypodontia

Congenitally or developmentally absent teeth:

 Congenital relates to a condition that is present at birth, as a result of either

heredity or environmental influences.

 Developmentally absent refers to a structure that normally forms after birth but

has failed to do so.

So an absent second premolar is NOT congenitally absent as it does not begin to develop until after birth, it would be more accurately described as developmentally absent. An absent primary central incisor (normally present at birth) would be correctly described as congenitally absent.

Hypodontia is the term used for absence of teeth:

 Primary tooth hypodontia:

- 0.1-0.9% Caucasian population, more common in the maxilla and

equal between males and females

- For 30-50% of cases of primary hypodontia will be followed by

permanent anomalies

 Permanent dentition hypodontia:

- Prevalence of 3.5-6.5% (excluding the wisdom teeth) and equal

frequency between maxilla and mandible

- Female: Male 4:1





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




- Most commonly affects the third molars (prevalence of 9-37%) - Type of tooth absent and population prevalence can vary with the racial

group studied

 Mild hypodontia: < 3 teeth absent

 Moderate hypodontia: 3 to six teeth absent

 Severe hypodontia: >six teeth absent





Six year old child with ectodermal dysplasia showing severe hypodontia. Note the

conical incisors





How old is this child? Which teeth are missing?



Tooth Size

 Size and shape are not easily separated and often interdependent

 Megadont or macrodont (large teeth)





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Macrodont teeth most often affects the maxillary permanent incisors and

mandibular second premolars

 Prevalence in UK school children of 1.1% in the permanent dentition

 Microdont (Small teeth, More common in females

 Microdont primary teeth are uncommon, prevalence of 0.2-0.5%

 Permanent teeth prevalence is 2.5%, generalized microdontia affecting 0.2%



Tooth Shape

Abnormalities in shape can originate during the morphodifferentiation stage of tooth development and are manifested as alterations in crown and root form.





Double Teeth

There are a number of other terms: Fusion, germination, dichotomy, synodontia, schizodontia, and connation…however these can allude to possible developmental aetiologies and so the more neutral double teeth is preferred



 Prevalence in the primary dentition 0.5-1.6%(Caucasians)  Permanent dentition is less commonly involved with a prevalence of

0.1-0.2%

 Males and females are equally affected  Clinically the presentation may be as a minor notch in the incisal edge

of a wider than normal tooth to the appearance of two almost separate crowns





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Primary dentition: mainly in the labial segments of the arch and more

common in the mandible

 Permanent dentition: occur in any region of the mouth but double

incisors are more frequently seen

 Frequency of permanent anomalies following primary double teeth is

30-50% (Caucasians)

 Physiological root resorption of double primary teeth is occasionally

retarded



Accessory Cusps

 Common in the primary and permanent dentitions

 Most common accessory cusp in the permanent dentition is the mesiopalatal

cusp of the first molar (cusp of carabelli) prevalence from 10-6-%

 Talon cusps occur in incisors and cause aesthetic and occlusal problems. An

examble is shown in the picture below.





Invaginated Teeth

 These result from the invagination of the enamel epithelium into the dental

papilla during development

 Correct term is a dens invaginatus or invaginated tooth NOT dens in dente,

gestant composite odontome or dilated composite odontome





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Clinically it may manifest as a cingulum pit to a tooth which has a grossly

distorted crown and root

 More common in the permanent dentition affecting 1-5% of the population

 Male: female ratio 2:1

 It is most common in maxillary lateral incisors





Evaginated Teeth

 This is more common in premolars and manifests as a conical projection

arising from the occlusal surface in the central fissure

 Mainly in monogloid races with a prevalence of 1-4%.

 Made up of enamel, dentine and pulp

 Often present with infected pulp after extra ‘cusp’ is traumatically fractured

and pulp exposed



Anomalies of Root Form

Taurodontism:

 This applies to multi rooted teeth where the body is enlarged corono-

apically at the expense of the roots

 Uncommon in the primary dentition  Prevalence of about 6.3%





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Accessory roots:

 These may occur in almost any tooth  More commonly seen in lower canines, premolars and molars  Prevalence in the primary dentition 1-9%, in the permanent dentition

figures range from 1-45%

 Teeth with accessory roots have larger crowns than normal and

possible association with supernumerary teeth



Tooth Structure and Colour

All Tissues

 Arrested development of tooth germs

- May be a sequela to irradiation, trauma, chemotherapy - Rarely it may be as a result of infection to the primary predecessor

 Odontodysplasia

- Rare and affects the sexes equally and affects the primary and

permanent dentitions

- Also known as Ghost teeth, regional odontodysplasia - Crowns of affected teeth are reduced in size and are rough with a

brown stained surface, soft to the probe

- Teeth are affected in a regional way but may cross the midline. Maxilla

is twice as commonly affected as the mandible





Enamel Defects

 Defective enamel may exhibit either hypoplasia, due to deficient matrix

production (quantitative defect) or hypomineralization from imperfect mineralization of the matrix proteins (qualitative defect)

 Hypoplastic enamel may be thin, grooved or pitted

 Hypomineralised enamel may be mottled or have opacities

 The main clinical characteristics will govern the classification of the anomaly,

but combinations of the two usually co-exist, especially at the histological level





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK





Genetically determined enamel defects:



 Those that are unassociated with a systemic abnormality are known as

amelogenesis imperfect (AI)

 Those that are associated with generalized disorders

- There are a number of uncommon genetically determined diseases

where defective enamel formation seems to be part of the condition

- Included are conditions such as epidermolysis bullosa, tuberous

sclerosis and tricho-dento osseous syndrome for example



Environmentally determined enamel defects:

These may be caused by a systemic or local factor



 Systemic

- Those related to systemic upset will be related to the timing of the

problem

- The part of the tooth affected will be that that was developing at the

time of the insult ; the defect will be chronologically arranged around the arch





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




 Localized

- Infection or trauma may result in enamel defects



Molar Incisor Hypomineralisation



This is the classical presentation resulting from a systemic insult impacting on the development of teeth at a particular point or period of time. The teeth affected are one or more of the first permanent molars and – in 50% of cases – the permanent incisors. It is likely therefore that the timing of the insult is at or around birth or within the first two years of life.

As the name suggests the enamel on the teeth is hypomineralised. This leads to teeth which have classical well demarcated defects. The defective enamel is more porous and – especially in the molar teeth – can break down under normal occlusal forces. This is known as posteruptive breakdown. These teeth can be very sensitive and are more prone to dental caries.

It is a common condition. One recent study has suggested that about 1 in 5 children in North Yorkshire are affected.



Dentine Defects

Those that primarily affect the dentine:



 Dentinogenesis imperfecta (DI) Type II

- All teeth in both dentitions are affected

- Teeth are bluish or brownish in colour

- Primary teeth are more severely affected and later forming permanent

teeth may not be affected at all

- Enamel chips off easily and then the dentine rapidly wears away. This

is most marked in the primary dentition. The teeth may then become infected

- The crowns appear bulbous radiographically and the root maybe short

and thin. The pulp chamber obliterates soon after eruption

- Prevalence of about 1 in 8000





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK









 Dentine dysplasia type I (radicular dentine dysplasia, rootless teeth)

- Both dentitions are affected, colour ranging from bluish to brownish

tinge

 Dentine dysplasia type II (coronal dentine dysplasia)

- Disparity of effect upon the primary and secondary dentitions - In the primary dentistion it is hard to tell it from DI Type II - Permanent teeth are of normal colour but radiographically show thistle

or flame shaped pulp chambers partly occluded by pulp stones



Those defects that are associated with generalized disorders:



 Osteogenesis imperfecta (Dentinogenesis imperfecta type I), Ehlers Danlos

syndrome, Vitamin D-resistant rickets, Vitamin D-dependent rickets





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Disturbances of Eruption

For primary teeth the eruption does not tend to vary with racial group; however the eruption pattern of the primary teeth can be very variable in comparison to the permanent dentition.



Permanent tooth eruption is the subject of considerable racial variation. To be very general, for the permanent dentition. Black people tend to be ahead of Chinese/ Japanese who are in advance of Caucasians. In the permanent dentition the teeth of females erupt several months before those of males.



Premature Eruption

This may be a familial feature and babies with high birth weights tend to erupt their primary teeth early.



Natal and neonatal teeth:

 Those teeth that are present at birth are natal teeth and those that erupt in the

first 30 days are neonatal teeth

 Incidence of 1 in 2000-3000 live births

 Most commonly the lower central incisor

 May be associated with Ellis-Van Creveld and Hallermann-Streiff syndromes

 Can affect feeding





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Retarded Eruption

Delayed eruption of primary teeth can occur in children born preterm or very low birthweight.



Delayed eruption may occur in both the primary and permanent dentition in conditions like Down syndrome and Turner syndrome or in gross nutritional deficiency, hypothyroidism or hypopituitarism.



Localized causes of delayed eruption include impaction (e.g. of the first permanent molar upon the distal of the second primary molar), presence of supernumeraries or odontomes.



Finally the very early extraction of primary teeth may be associated with delayed eruption of the permanent successors.



Disturbances of Exfoliation



Premature Exfoliation

There are a number of uncommon conditions that may result in the premature loss of primary teeth. These sometimes may proceed to involve the permanent teeth. Examples are Hypophosphatasia (aplasia or hypoplasia of the cementum leads to the premature loss of teeth); immunological conditions that result in neutropenia may lead to gross periodontal destruction and Histiocytosis X where invasion of histiocytic tissue destroys supporting alveolar bone.





PAEDIATRIC DENTISTRY CLINICAL HANDBOOK




Delayed Exfoliation

Infraocclusion:





 This is better term than submerged as the teeth are NOT actively

sinking, the jaws and other teeth are actively growing around them.

 Prevalence is between 1-9% with the primary dentition being more

frequently affected. The mandibuilar first primary molar is the most commonly affected tooth. More than one tooth in one individual may be affected and it may occur symmetrically.

 Developmentally absent premolars are more common in children who

have infraoccluded primary molars than in the general population.

 Apart from those without permanent successors the infraoccluded teeth

are not generally delayed in their exfoliation and the majority will exfoliate naturally within the normal range.



Recommended Reading

 Tahmassebi J.F, Day P, Toumba K.J, Andreadis G. (2003). Dental anomalies

in children. Dental Update 30:534-540.

 Willmott N.S, Bryan R.A, Duggal M.S. (2008) Molar-incisor-

hypomineralisation: a literature review. [Review] European Archives of Paediatric Dentistry 9:172-9.





